It’s the type of decision consumers are faced with on a regular basis – should I rent or buy? Apply for a contract or settle for prepaid? Pay cash or swipe my credit card? Various factors play a role in these decisions and while some may optimise for convenience or cash flow, others may argue that cold hard numbers should inform the decision. If you have R15 000 available for accommodation each month, it is surely better to rent a place for R8 000 and buy shares for R7 000 rather than buy a place where you pay R12 000 towards a mortgage and another R3 000 for levies, taxes and utilities? Depending on the assumptions, the math may indeed show that renting is better than buying, but whether the reality will mimic the assumptions will depend on a factor that one tends to disregard when making these decisions: individual behaviour. Ronny Rent versus Betty Buyer Ronny Rent may start out well buying shares of R7 000 each month, but if he loses interest after a few months and decides to spend the money, Betty Buyer may well turn out to be better off, assuming she had the discipline to stick with her strategy. Home ownership can be a costly exercise and recent returns have generally not been great, but it remains a good method of ‘compulsory’ saving. While the consequences of not investing may be largely invisible in the short run, not paying a bond for a few months will have a very noticeable impact – finding yourself on the street. There are various financial examples where the numbers will show that one option is much better than the alternative. Conventional wisdom may suggest that someone should pay off their bond as quickly as possible to save interest. The math will likely support the assertion, but will it still be the best option if they find themselves out of debt after seven years, only to buy a property twice the size with borrowed money? Another example: if someone has the opportunity to buy clothes worth R2 000 using cash or a six-month interest-free account, it will be cheaper to use credit (if you consider the interest forgone in a time/value-of-money calculation), but when confronted with the option to pay later, it is incredibly tempting to spend much more than R2 000. Again, behaviour may trump the maths. Extreme examples of how people retired or became debt-free by age 35 usually make for a great read. Unfortunately, such stories often rely on a financial approach that is unlikely to work for most people, mainly due to behavioural factors. Read: How I paid off my house in under five years If not saving for retirement allows you to pay all your debt by your early 30s, that may sound like a great idea. Unfortunately, such extreme examples only work for a small minority of people who have the discipline to catch up afterwards. Perhaps the problem with sound long-term financial planning is its lack of excitement and the patience it requires. Being debt-free by 35 sounds much more exciting than contributing to a retirement annuity while paying off your bond over a shortened period. Much like a balanced diet, a balanced, consistent approach to financial wellbeing and saving is the best approach for most people as it is easier to stick to such a plan in the long run. Ultimately, the best approach to saving and investing is one that fits your unique circumstances and behavioural make-up. Acknowledging how your behaviour may impact your plan can go a long way in getting you to your goal.