SoftBank Group Corp is seeking to raise 2.4 trillion yen ($21.1 billion) in the initial public offering of its domestic telecom operations scheduled for December 19. The Japanese technology conglomerate plans to sell 1.6 billion shares at 1 500 yen apiece, it said in a statement Monday, valuing the business at 7.18 trillion yen. SoftBank founder Masayoshi Son is listing the company’s cash cow to raise capital to keep making investments in tech startups. The offering comes at a time when the wireless unit faces potential pricing pressure. NTT Docomo, Japan’s biggest mobile carrier, has announced plans to cut rates 40% in response to government pressure to reduce peoples’ phone bills. At the same time, Japanese web retailer Rakuten is jumping into the market as a budget provider. “Market sentiment is not as good as it used to be, and investor appetite may not be so strong,” said Yasuhide Yajima, chief economist at NLI Research Institute in Tokyo. “Still, their focus is on data, AI and communication — industries where they can anticipate growth, so investors can’t exclude SoftBank from their target.” The IPO price range will be set on November 30, followed by the final price on December 10. SoftBank has picked Nomura Holdings, Goldman Sachs Group, Deutsche Bank, Mizuho Financial Group, JPMorgan Securities and Sumitomo Mitsui Financial Group among joint global coordinators. SoftBank is targeting individuals and Nomura will sell the biggest part of the shares to retail investors, people familiar with the matter said earlier this month. Domestic telco operations, which include wireless, broadband and fixed-line services, generated 1.8 trillion yen in revenue and 447 billion yen of income in the six months to September. Mobile phone offerings accounted for more than 60% of sales. SoftBank has close to 34 million wireless subscribers in Japan. Japan’s mobile carriers have come under government scrutiny for high phone bills and convoluted pricing plans. In August, chief cabinet Secretary Yoshihide Suga said mobile carriers had room to lower bills by 40%, even as they step up spending to upgrade their networks. Docomo earlier this month said it plans to “return” 400 billion yen to customers, while KDDI said it won’t follow along because it already introduced lower rates. Son has said the competition won’t hurt his company’s profits. He said SoftBank aims to cut costs by trimming about 40% of the wireless business workforce, largely by introducing automation technology. Some employees will be reallocated to other parts of SoftBank. © 2018 Bloomberg L.P