Chinese consumers are calling for a boycott of Dolce & Gabbana after the Italian fashion house posted videos that are being criticized as racist and insensitive, setting off a social media drama that’s led to the postponement of its Shanghai runway show hours before it was due to start. The videos show a Chinese model struggling to eat Italian dishes like spaghetti and cannoli pastry with a pair of chopsticks. They were originally posted this week on Weibo, a Chinese micro-blogging service, and were deleted after a widespread backlash. The clips can still be viewed on the company’s Instagram account as of Wednesday. The company did not immediately respond to text messages and emails seeking commeChinese consumers spent more than $100 billion on high-end purchases last year — almost a third of the global total. Fears that Chinese demand for premium goods was slowing in the face of waning consumer confidence and the ongoing US-China trade war sent jitters across global luxury stocks last month, wiping out some $160 billion in market value. Chinese netizens said the ads had racist overtones, from the way chopsticks were dismissed as “little cylindrical tools” to the stereotypical look of the model, who was dressed in a red sequined D&G dress. The clips feature traditional Chinese music and a suggestive voiceover from a male narrator, who at one point asks the model trying to eat the cannoli: “Is it too big for you?” The ads were part of a campaign to promote the luxury brand’s Shanghai runway show that was scheduled for Wednesday. The dispute gained steam as screenshots surfaced of the luxury brand co-founder Stefano Gabbana’s Instagram message exchanges with a follower in which he said that the videos were posted “by my will.” Gabbana himself shared a screenshot of that same conversation on his Instagram account. He also wrote ‘China Ignorant Dirty Smelling Mafia’ in another message, according to a screenshot that was widely shared. The brand later said in social media posts that its account and that of Gabbana had been hacked. The company apologised for “any impact and harm that these false comments have done to China and the Chinese people” and said that it always “loves and respects” the country and its culture. Dolce & Gabbana has courted controversy in China before. Just last year, the brand pulled online ads after Internet users took to social media to criticise the company for portraying an underdeveloped China in the campaign. Before the brand announced the postponement of Wednesday’s show, several Chinese celebrities including actresses Zhang Ziyi and Li BingBing announced they would not be attending in light of the scandal. Both said they would be boycotting the brand from now on, joining other calls across Chinese social media to avoid buying the brand’s products. Chinese social media was riveted by the unfolding drama. “D&G show cancelled” and “D&G designer” occupied the top two most-searched topics on China’s Weibo on Wednesday afternoon. © 2018 Bloomberg L.P