For South Africans caught up in the hurly-burly of local news, the politics and economics of Brexit are unalarming. However, for companies like Investec, which derive a significant portion of their income from their UK operations, the uncertainty is big. “What worries us is the impact of a chaotic Brexit or a political change part of the way through the process,” says Investec joint CEO Hendrik du Toit. “If political change happens, the risk is that government does not get the right steerer to negotiate a fundamentally important transaction for the British economy,” he says. While the impact of Brexit will vary from industry to industry, the UK finance industry’s access to the European Union is expected to be downgraded, to the horror of the City of London, the world’s unofficial financial capital. But Du Toit does not believe Brexit will have a negative impact on Investec’s businesses. “We are Brexit-ready,” he says. “That’s because the Specialised Banking business as well as the Wealth and Investment business are largely UK-based, with a limited European client base.” <a href="http://iono.fm/e/626270">Content hosted by iono.fm</a> Asset Management does have a European client base, however, this business has a separate legal and fund structure that is domiciled in the EU. “When it came to asset management the single market was always a bit of a myth, so it should be easy for us to operate in a post-Brexit world.” While Brexit and political uncertainty have impacted corporate and consumer confidence in the UK and eroded the value of sterling, Investec delivered solid results for the six months to September, buoyed by a good performance from the UK Specialist Banking and Asset Management businesses. Source: Investec results presentation for the six months ended September 30, 2018 Operating profit before tax increased by 14.2% to £359.3 million – an increase of 17.6% on a currency-neutral basis. The combined South African businesses (Specialist Banking, Asset Management, and Wealth & Investment) reported operating profit 5% ahead of the prior period (in rands), while the combined UK and other businesses posted a 40.2% increase in operating profit in pounds sterling. Overall group results have been negatively impacted by the depreciation of the average rand/pound exchange rate of about 4.1% over the period. Adjusted earnings per share increased by 6.4% from 26.6 pence to 28.3 pence – an increase of 9.4% on a currency-neutral basis. “Banks are geared plays on the economy and as such, the Investec results accurately reflect the low growth South African economy and a staid UK economy – the latter effectively in limbo as result of the Brexit negotiations,” says Reuben Beelders, a portfolio manager at Gryphon Asset Management. “While the results are solid relative to the underlying economies to which the group is exposed, the UK Specialist Banking operations [which contributed 21% to total operating profit] were buoyed by reduced impairments on their legacy portfolio,” he says. This saw the division report a 96% increase in operating profit. In addition, earnings were supported by strong growth in net interest income and fee income largely driven by the corporate business. The Specialist Banking business will, particularly in South African, also have to contend with an increasingly competitive landscape as Discovery and a number of smaller niche players chip away at Investec’s target market, says Beelders. Asset Management operating profit increased by 10% to £91.5 million. Net inflows of £4.1 billion supported the growth in total funds under management to £109.2 billion. Wealth & Investment operating profit decreased by 6.3% to £46.4 million. Earnings have been impacted by growth in headcount for IT initiatives, compliance requirements, and continued recruitment of experienced portfolio managers and financial planners to support future revenue growth. The results must be seen as a watershed set in that last year’s interims were signed off by founders Stephen Koseff and Bernard Kantor. “Perhaps the results are instructive in what they reveal about the changing people rather than the changing numbers,” adds Beelders. “We took over a business with positive momentum,” says Du Toit. “We have identified three core focus areas: to grow the revenue line, allocate capital wisely, and manage the cost base. Following Fani [Titi, the other joint CEO] and my strategic review of the business, we have elected to simplify the business and part of that involves the demerger and separate listing of Asset Management.” This process – which is still subject to regulatory and shareholder approval – is already unleashing new energy. “We are committing to new objectives, setting new and more demanding goals, and in the process adding value to the business,” says Du Toit. “However we are under no illusions that the next year or two [won’t] be tough. But we are long-term thinkers.” The board declared a dividend of 11 pence per ordinary share, up from 10.5 pence last year.