Tigon-accused Gary Porritt has refused to say whether he is about to get legal representation in his criminal trial on more than 3 000 charges of fraud, racketeering and contraventions of the Companies Act, Stock Exchanges Control Act and Income Tax Act. Porritt and his co-accused Sue Bennett have been without legal representation in the trial that is ongoing in the South Gauteng High Court in Johannesburg. He is the former CEO of JSE-listed financial services group Tigon, of which Bennett was a director. Tigon collapsed around 2002 and the events surrounding that led to the arrest of both. The court has had to bend over backwards to accommodate the pair as lay persons to guard against infringement of their right to a fair trial. This has however slowed down proceedings considerably. Porritt has regularly acted in contempt of court and has been warned against occupying himself with irrelevant matters when being questioned, instead of answering the charges against him. Porritt and Bennett have stated that they don’t have money to pay for lawyers, but the state has accused them of using legal representation – or the lack thereof – as a trial strategy. At crucial moments during the trial, when bringing appeals, applications and during investigations, they did obtain the services of attorneys and advocates. According to investigating officer Sandra van Wyk, Porritt has direct or indirect access to assets worth more than R100 million, presumably through a complex web of trusts and companies. Read: Tigon – How court outmanoeuvred Porritt, Bennett Judge Brian Spilg earlier advised Porritt to speak to his estranged wife and attorney of record, Frank Cohen, who are the trustees of the Snowdon Trust, which has Porritt’s four children as beneficiaries. Spilg pointed out that the children have a “reciprocal obligation and duty of care” towards Porritt if he is indigent, and that Porritt could exercise his right in that regard to get the money for legal representation. Nevertheless, the pair is still representing themselves in court. The matter has however become relevant once again in the past two weeks after the High Court in Pietermaritzburg heard a civil claim against Porritt and Bennett in their capacities as trustees of the Surrey Development Trust. In this case, the South African Revenue Service (Sars) is claiming R12 million that was set aside as a dividend from the liquidation of Lamax for payment to Synergy Management, entities linked to the accused. According to Sars Synergy owes it almost R250 million in unpaid income tax and value-added tax (Vat), and it hopes to grab at least the R12 million. Porritt, Bennett and Synergy however dispute this and argue that the money should be paid to the Surrey Development Trust in terms of a 2003 cession, the lawfulness of which Sars questions. Porritt and Bennett have accused Sars of targeting the payment to deprive them of the means to defend themselves effectively in the criminal trial. It is a known fact that Sars is funding their prosecution. Porritt was extremely outspoken during the criminal trial and also blamed Spilg of depriving him of the opportunity to get funds for legal representation. According to Porritt he would have received the necessary funds as soon as the Sars civil case started irrespective of the outcome, because he was prepared to assist the respondents. In 2016 Spilg refused to postpone the criminal trial to allow Porritt to attend the civil case and, as a result, the civil case was then postponed and only heard in the past two weeks. Eventually Bennett and not Porritt testified against Sars. The hearing concluded, and judgment was reserved. If Porritt’s representation to Spilg holds up, he should, following the Pietermaritzburg hearing, have access to funds to hire a lawyer. This could result in a much more speedy and efficient trial. When the criminal trial resumed this week both accused were, however, still on their own. Moneyweb asked Porritt during a court adjournment whether following the Sars hearing he will now be able to afford a lawyer, but he refused to answer. * Advocate Réan Strydom SC represented Porritt and Bennett against Sars and advocate KJ Kemp SC represented Synergy Management (Pty) Ltd.