Government has for decades expected too much from the private sector, and for decades has not trusted it. Businesses have often felt that politicians were being hostile towards them – not simply because of the use of terms such as white monopoly capital  (WMC), but because of the continuous increase in rules and regulations, and the anti-market sentiment displayed by most government ministers and their minions. Ongoing negative comment about business leaders on matters such as the disproportionately high income the select few receive has never been offset by acknowledgement of the fact that the typical employer earns only R8 000 a month, compared to the R3 200 received by the typical employee. It’s easy to slam business by reporting that the typical employee earns R3 200 a month compared to the multinational CEO who earns a few million a month. There is no context – no appreciation of the fact that the one figure is derived from South African survey data while the other relates to a few select big companies whose bosses often don’t even live in South Africa! There is no context to the reporting; no nod to the fact that surveys indicate that, as a rule, employers work 40% longer hours per week, or that in relation to the risks that they take R8 000 per month is not an excessive amount of money. There is no reporting on the fact that the typical employer is at least a decade older and is the one taking risks. The fact that the typical employer pays themself only 80% more per hour than the typical employee, while risking everything, is never contemplated. The employer has to lead their business through tough times. On average, employees earn more There is no reporting that the typical self-employed person earns less than the typical employee. There has been no reporting on the fact that survey data shows that employees in mining and the utility sector earn more than the typical employer! Never has anyone used data from government documents showing that more than 75% of government employees earn more than the typical employer. While President Cyril Ramaphosa has at least changed the sentiment, there is that sticky expropriation without compensation (EWC) part, which could lead to our constitution being changed. And of course the new national health insurance (NHI) and competition bills mean business will face a host of new challenges. But more than that, for years South African business has struggled. Turnover growth for the year to June was equal to inflation, so no real growth happened. Yes, some have made money, but most businesses could have made a better return in the bank had they sold their assets at book value. Government and unions thought business was a giant cow made for milking, and  business, wondering who this evil partner they had to live with was, felt there was little chance of mutual understanding. Employer numbers did not grow in SA; they declined, as did the number of self-employed. But the number of unemployed grew – from 6.4 million to 9.8 million people. An extra 3.4 million people unemployed. The other truth The truth about business is that making money is difficult. Most businesses don’t  last longer than five years (this refers to those that start to trade rather than stillborn ideas). Unemployment Insurance Fund (UIF) figures show that the average number of people employed per formal enterprise has declined – from 34 people per commercial enterprise in the 1980s to 8.8 people per employer in 2016. Labour force survey data from Statistics SA shows that only 3.6% of our population are employers, down from 4.4% a decade ago and 4.7% in 2002. This is one of the lowest numbers in the world and certainly contributes to the huge levels of unemployment SA has seen. SA’s labour force: percentage of those who are employers or self-employed Source: Economists.co.za The typical employer has between three and five employees and is struggling to meet its obligations all of the time. Today, 58% of employers are African (up from around 40% a decade ago and less than 30% during the early 1990s), while 20% of all private employers, and 42% of the self-employed, are women. Moreover, about one in eight employers employs unpaid family members while many more pay family to work for them. More often than not the rules in SA are designed for a business with hundreds if not thousands of employees. Even mayors who have been entrepreneurs themselves fail to see this as a recent development. Our president was the owner of a large enterprise; he may not know that most employers are a fraction of the size of his old enterprise! Big or small, the same rules apply Rules and requirements such as BEE, AA, competition law, labour regulations and a host of other conditions of doing business seem to assume that business is large and has extra hands to implement it all. I am a proud small employer and have been part of the chamber movement for close on two decades. I have seen employers come and go. I have seen the emotions of failure and the financial disasters that are known as riding the wave. I sense the hope and the fear that the self-employed have. I know the tears and gut-wrenching decisions about retrenchments that we must make. I am lucky to have survived this long. More than that, I am lucky to know and understand the data and the figures; when making a loss, I know I am not alone. I understand when fellow entrepreneurs tell me they do not want to employ any more people. I know what working on a project for weeks and months only to find out that it has been delayed or cancelled feels like. In my experience, more often than not people with fixed income think employers are rich and live the life. I know this is false, but it makes it even harder for entrepreneurs who fail as they are led to believe that failure is unusual. This belief, particularly in South Africa, is misplaced and a hindrance to growth. Failure is not pretty even without the false belief that it does not happen. Think of the statistic that only about 12% of businesses survive longer than 10 years! The best thing many entrepreneurs heard was when the president said we need business to perform. Many an entrepreneur feels that someone is just starting to listen. Overall business confidence was still negative, but we got a start. I pray that much of the misplaced hate and false facts eases and that a large part of our population starts to understand the risk-takers and the doers! Mike Schüssler is chief economist at Economists.co.za