The market share of illegal cigarettes sold in South Africa jumped to 33.1% in the third quarter of 2018, according to the latest Ipsos research report on the illicit tobacco trade. Francois van der Merwe, chairman of the Tobacco Institute of Southern Africa (Tisa), said at a media briefing in Johannesburg that South Africa is facing a massive onslaught in the illicit tobacco trade. He notes that tobacco is the biggest contributor to the fiscus all over the world and that this provides an incentive for traders to evade the taxes levied on tobacco products. If the South African Revenue Service (Sars) had continued with Operation Honey Badger, he said, we wouldn’t be standing here today. “When [former Sars commissioner Tom] Moyane put a stop to this initiative, illegal operators took the gap, and made billions.” He added that Tisa cannot catch criminals, it cannot enforce the law – but it can measure. Measurement of the illegal tobacco trade is one of the few avenues open to the tobacco industry. If government understands and is made aware of the quantum of the loss to the fiscus, greater urgency will be applied to curtailing the illicit tobacco trade. Ipsos, a global market research and consulting firm engaged by Tisa, measured the size of the illicit tobacco market in two tranches. The results of the first study were presented in July and termed Wave 1. The second study, Wave 2, was undertaken in September. Too cheap to be legal In order to measure the size of the illicit market, Ipsos settled on a conservative benchmark of the minimum collectible tax (MCT) of R17.85 per pack of 20, or 90 cents per single cigarette. This amount excludes any costs. Any selling price below this is considered illegal for the purposes of the study. This methodology was accepted by academics and peers. Ipsos selected a representative sample of retail outlets (excluding mobile hawkers, taverns and shebeens), auditing each one twice, in June and again in September. In total, 4 124 shops were audited twice out of a universe of 136 968. The study demonstrated that in the three months from June to September, illegal cigarette activity escalated at an alarming rate, with the market share of cigarettes selling at MTC increasing from 33.4% to 41.8%. RG, manufactured by Gold Leaf Tobacco, is now the biggest selling brand in southern Africa (measured by physical products sold). Thus: “South Africa becomes the first country in the world to allow an illegal cigarette brand to become the top seller.” Market share escalates Brands retailing below the MCT in September make up 33.1% (June: 26.8%) of sales in South Africa. This is an increase of 24% over three months. In the informal market, four out of every 10 sticks sold are below MCT. The market share of sales below MCT has increased from 33.4% to 41.8%. While MCT sales have arisen across the country, in informal markets in the Western Cape and North West, these illicit trades have overtaken legal sales. The below-MCT brands sell for between R5 and R10 a pack. Brands from the Gold Leaf Tobacco Company make up 73% of all sales below the MCT – with 89% of its RG cigarette, now the top-selling brand in SA, sold below MCT. Yusuf Abramjee, the spokesperson for #TakeBackTheTax, said that state capture was financed with illegal tobacco money. He further said that Sars’s failure to act against tax-dodging manufacturers has resulted in lost tax revenue increasing from R7 billion to R8 billion. Lesotho crackdown He referred to the Lesotho Revenue Authority (LRA), which is fighting back against the illicit trade in cigarettes. On November 16, the LRA made its biggest bust in five years, confiscating 38 boxes (380 000 sticks) of RG cigarettes worth over R1 million being smuggled into Lesotho. The LRA considers RG to be an illicit cigarette as it is usually sold below the M20 (R1 = M1.0045) threshold for a packet of cigarettes. It carries out routine checks as part of its strategy to deter non-compliance. The #TakeBackTheTax campaign referred to the latest research from Ipsos as “a terrible indictment” on Sars. Asked whether the tobacco industry could improve its supply chain management, Van der Merwe said Sars is responsible for this but that a tamper-proof counter could be installed on cigarette manufacturing machines. He added that Sars is looking at new technology. While retailers could be encouraged not to stock illegal cigarettes (Spar has apparently stopped selling underpriced cigarettes), 80% are sold in the informal economy and Tisa does not want to criminalise small business. Abramjee said “it is no secret as to how these illegal operators operate” and that “if Sars does not act very soon, the legal cigarette market could die.” The Ipsos report shows that the illicit tobacco trade has put 12 000 direct jobs, affecting more than 35 000 dependents, at risk. Tisa disputes the allegation that cigarettes sold below the MCT are counterfeit: “It is not credible that almost all sales in a particular brand are from counterfeiters and not the brand owner.” Not on Stats SA’s radar Allan Mukoki, CEO of the SA Chamber of Commerce and Industry noted after the briefing that illicit trade is not counted in official statistics by Stats SA and that this could have an impact on decisions made by the credit rating agencies. The study illustrates that the illicit traders have been able to flourish during this period, despite “undertakings from Sars” that it was committed to acting “against illicit operators”. Those behind the illicit brands will continue to invest heavily in distribution and stabilising supply into the market until a concerted effort is made to stamp out the illicit tobacco trade. Read: Illicit cigarette industry beats Sars We pay our taxes, says cigarette maker