Here’s what caught our attention on Tuesday: 1. Gordhan steps up for day 2 at state capture inquiry Public enterprises minister, Pravin Gordhan will take the stand for the second time on Tuesday. Gordhan told the inquiry on Monday that Zuma was pushing for the nuclear deal from Russia to materialise, even though South Africa could not afford it. The deal was valued at R1 trillion. Gordhan said the Zuma administration’s insistence on the deal was the first indication of the state being captured. More will be revealed on Tuesday. Read: Gordhan’s first state-capture revelation: SA’s nuke deal 2. Rhodes Food group results Rhodes Food group, the supplier of fresh, frozen, long-life and convenience foods is reporting a 32.9% decrease in headline earnings per share for the year ended September 30, 2018. The company says this is due to weak international results. Rhodes Food group’s diluted headline earnings per share also fell by 34.9% to 60.8 cents, while group turnover increased by 11.2%. The company has declared a dividend of 20.3 cents, 34.7% lower than the previous year. 3. Coronation results Fund management company, Coronation is reporting a 4% decrease in basic and diluted headline earnings per share to 420.7 cents for the year ended September 30, 2018. The company says against the backdrop of a tough domestic economic environment and pressure on emerging markets, its total assets under management fell by 4.4% to R587 billion. The company is declaring a total dividend of 420 cents per share. 4. Eskom introduces eight stages of load shedding Eskom’s issues are escalating. We once thought that level four load shedding was bad enough, but now the utility has implemented eight stages of load shedding. This comes as Eskom battles with deteriorating coal stockpiles. Moneyweb reports that the eight stages mean 8 000 MW needs to be shed, which also translates to shedding more than 26% of the electricity demand of 30 009 MW forecast this week. Read: Now there are eight stages of Eskom misery 5. Steinhoff has a new boss In case you didn’t notice, Steinhoff has a new boss, and the news sent shares soaring. Louis du Preez has been appointed as the new CEO of Steinhoff and will take over from current acting CEO Danie van der Merwe at the end of December. According to Reuters, Du Preez  joined the Steinhoff group in mid-2017. Also, don’t miss Moneyweb’s #RetireWell seminar