Minority shareholders in the Airports Company of SA (Acsa) have been trying for the best part of a decade to sell their shares back to government after it reneged on its promise to privatise and then list the company that manages SA’s nine biggest airports. In August and December last year, a high court settlement was reached between minorities, Acsa and the minister of transport ordering Acsa to purchase the minorities’ shares out of its retained income. It was also ordered to appoint a “referee” to determine the value of these shares after adjusting for “oppressive conduct” which prejudiced the minorities. The parties agreed to the appointment of RisCura Solutions as the referee, which determined a value of just short of R78 a share, or R700 million for the minorities’ 1.8% shareholding. This was nearly eight times the R10.36 a share Acsa was offering to pay minorities in 2014. No doubt alarmed at the quantum it would have to fork out, in July this year the state applied to have the 2017 court orders rescinded, though this matter has yet to come to court. Minorities argue that this shows extreme bad faith by the state, since it was party to the settlement agreement in August last year. Only two minorities with 1.8% of Acsa are fighting the current case. Should the court agree with the R78-a-share valuation, the other three minorities with a further 2.4% may choose to sell out, meaning Acsa would have to deplete its retained earnings by R1.6 billion. Acsa minorities are now headed back to court, this time seeking an order compelling Acsa and the government to purchase their 1.8% shareholding at the RisCura valuation of R78 a share. African Harvest adviser Alun Frost, deposing for the minorities, says if Acsa opposes the valuation, then minorities reserve the right to argue for a higher price of R191 a share. Acsa has indeed opposed the matter, arguing that the RisCura valuation “bears no relation to reality” and the payment of R700 million to minorities out of retained income would reduce both its equity and its reserves. If Acsa were forced to pay out this sum, in which the public has a significant interest via the state’s shareholding, it would divert money “from serving the public into private hands without any proper basis,” argues Acsa’s acting chief financial officer Dirk Kunz in his replying affidavit. Minorities say this argument is ironic given the fact that government has invested no money into Acsa since 1993, nor has it provided any funding guarantees to the company. The purchase price paid by the minorities for their Acsa shares in 1998 went to government, not to Acsa. Professor Harvey Wainer of Wits University’s School of Accountancy, in a supplementary affidavit for Acsa, valued the company at R18.1 billion or R36.36 a share, which would give minorities just R327 million for their shareholding. That’s less than half the RisCura valuation. Wainer determined that no adjustments to the valuation for “oppressive conduct” are necessary. This is seen as a test case for government’s commitment to honouring its promises, and could cast a shadow over President Cyril Ramaphosa’s efforts to drum up US$100 billion in investment to revive the country’s flaccid economy. Acsa is 74.6% owned by the state, 20% by the Public Investment Corporation (PIC) and the balance by minorities, which includes African Harvest and Up-Front Investments 65. After Telkom, Acsa was to be SA’s flagship privatisation experiment, but this quickly fizzled out due to political pressure from the left. On the promise of a stock exchange listing, government persuaded Aeroporti di Roma (ADR) to acquire 20% of the company in 1998 at R8.19 a share. When listing was out of the question, ADR sold its shareholding to the PIC for R16.75 a share, doubling its money over seven years. This left minorities with their 4.2% shareholding and no buyers. They had no option but to sell back to government. Minorities have consistently argued they are the victims of oppressive conduct by Acsa and the state on the grounds that the promised listing of the company, used to entice shareholders to invest in the 1990s, was later abandoned. They also accuse the minister of transport of using Acsa as a developmental tool in violation of Acsa’s commercial objectives and of neglect in exercising oversight in the setting of airport tariffs in accordance with the Airports Company Act. Airport tariffs appear to make little commercial sense. The Acsa Act requires tariffs to be set at a level that allows Acsa to make a reasonable commercial return, yet they were reduced last year by 35.5% apparently to boost traffic at Durban’s new King Shaka International Airport. Acsa is also accused of poor governance and unnecessary capital spending – such as the 20% investment in the Guarulhos International Airport in São Paulo in Brazil and 10% in the Chhatrapati Shivaji International Airport in Mumbai in India – which minorities say destroyed shareholder value, as well as fraud and corruption at senior management levels. Wainer’s valuation is lower than the net asset value (NAV) published in its latest financial statements and minorities will likely argue that if that is the case, Acsa has made a material financial misstatement and should rightfully impair its assets by more than R2 billion. “If Acsa truly believes minorities’ shares have a value less than the audited NAV, then this will only be plausible when it impairs its asset values,” says Frost. Frost points to further inconsistencies between Acsa’s court papers and its financial statements. For example, Kunz points to Acsa’s weak growth prospects in the court papers to buttress the company’s plea for a lower valuation, but such claims are absent from its annual financial statements. Acsa’s new capex plans include the building of a new runway at the Cape Town airport and the new OR Tambo midfield project. These projects will have to be funded from bond issues on the JSE. Frost says the consequences of Acsa overstating its asset values in its financial statements are troubling. “All Acsa directors for the past 10 to 15 years may be guilty of a breach of their fiduciary duties, gross negligence and gross misrepresentations to Acsa bond holders, shareholders and other stakeholders. Capex incurred by Acsa is effectively worthless because it cannot generate a return, and would be categorised as fruitless and wasteful expenditure. Those responsible for approving the fruitless and wasteful expenditure would have to be held accountable and potentially liable.” Acsa’s R1 billion investment in the São Paulo airport, which is technically insolvent, would likewise be considered fruitless and wasteful, as would the politically-motivated decision to invest in Durban’s King Shaka International Airport which cost upwards of R10 billion and made a R53 million loss in the 2018 financial year.