Astral Foods reported results for the second half of 2018 with the group’s external revenue up 4.5% to R13 billion. Higher poultry selling prices, as well as volumes, supported the integrated poultry producer’s performance across all divisions together with lower feed raw material costs. Astral Foods reported a profit after tax of R1.43 billion buoyed by the poultry division’s operating profit, which increased by 127.7% to R1.45 billion. The group’s external revenue for the period also rose by 4.5% to R13 billion supported by higher poultry selling prices as well as higher volumes across all divisions. In October, Astral’s share price rose 8.4%, following a trading update that showed the group’s performance with Heps then expected to increase by 90% and earnings expected to double. Astral has continued to benefit from low poultry feed prices following the recovery in cereal yields. “The feed division posted an increase of 16.7% in operating profit to R457 million. Contributions from the other Africa operations continued to improve, reflecting a R5 million increase in operating profit to R32 million,” says Gary Arnold, business development director at Astral Foods. “Net interest income of R52 million was reported against a net finance cost of R15 million for the prior year.” Said Astral in its trading statement: “Although the results for the second half of 2018 are comparable with that of the second half of 2017, poultry sales volumes and selling prices came under pressure towards the end of the 2018 financial year due to a weakening in consumer demand.” Imports, VAT hike, and fuel prices dampen the outlook Tough economic conditions in the retail space pressed with an economic recession worsened trading conditions in the second half for the food company. The rand’s performance only added more pressure to Astral’s cost of production given the group’s major inputs being procured abroad. “Typically, a weak rand does not help us, particularly on imported raw materials. Our largest import is imported raw materials that go into animal feed and much of these are imported,” says Arnold. “On average the monthly total poultry imports for the period under review equalled about 45% of local production at about 8.6 million birds per week,” he says. “High levels of poultry imports from Brazil and the USA, the major exporters to South Africa at present, are expected to continue.” However, despite the pressure from global players, the poultry group commended the European Union’s European Partnership Agreement safeguard duty, which has been imposed on poultry imports into South Africa from the European Union. On the demand side, Astral Foods continued to feel the pressure from subdued consumer disposable incomes that are overstretched by higher fuel prices and the increase in VAT. “Increases in the fuel price and the VAT rate have had a negative impact on the consumer, with current trading conditions not as favourable as in the corresponding reporting period of the previous year,” the company said. Fattening capital expenditure Capital expenditure of R356 million is relatively high compared to prior years. The binge was attributed to  R113 million spent on costs incurred on additional water sources in the Western Cape, and costs to mitigate risks associated with Listeria and bird flu. However, cash generated from operating activities surged 15.1% to R1.21 billion. The group also declared surplus cash at the end of the year at R789 million, which improved the cash position to fund the final dividend of 1,050 cents per share. In addition, R1.4 billion was set aside for capacity expansion projects at poultry processing plants, broiler farms, and a feed mill expansion. Astral’s poultry production division was also earmarked for expansion as the group president seeks to increase the division’s production’s levels by 20% with an approved capital expenditure amount totalling R1.1 billion.