Brexit is a mess. Whether you support the UK’s departure from the European Union or not, the political disaster that the process has turned into has dented the country’s image as a beacon of stability. It has also had a big impact on the country’s stock market. Since the 2016 referendum in which voters supported Brexit, UK equities have underperformed developed markets as a whole by around 20%. “A lot of people have voted with their feet,” says Sue Noffke, UK equity fund manager at Schroders. “They have withdrawn assets, and that has caused a market de-rating.” For South African investors, this should sound rather familiar. South Africa’s economic and political problems have had a very similar effect on the JSE. Local equity returns have been effectively flat since the middle of 2014. The similarities don’t end there. “The UK equity market is quite unusual in that it gives investors two distinct types of opportunities,” Noffke says. “Two-thirds of the market is characterised by multinational businesses. Typically they are very large businesses trading outside of the UK with quite a small exposure to the domestic economy. There is also about one-third of the stock market that is much more local. It does its business in the UK.” The multinationals and ‘SA Inc’ This is a very similar pattern to what one finds on the JSE. The large cap sector is dominated by multinationals, some of which have no exposure to the South African economy at all, while a smaller portion of the market is what is commonly called ‘SA Inc’ – businesses directly exposed to the local economy. In both countries, the entire market has however been dragged down by local political and economic uncertainties. As with South Africa, the outlook for the British economy over the short term is unimpressive. GDP growth in the UK is forecast to be between 1.2% and 1.3% next year, which is well below the 2% expected for the eurozone. The current market environment in both countries is therefore remarkably similar, and the sentiment is overwhelmingly negative. However, investing has to be forward-looking, and it is often in times of depressed performance that the greatest opportunities arise. Read: Investors have given up on the JSE “The market multiple in the UK is close to a 12 times price-to-earnings ratio,” Noffke says. “That is across the whole market, not just the domestic part. And if I look at the dividend yield at 4.5%, that is the highest since the financial crisis. I don’t think we are looking at a recession in that order of magnitude. It would be a local one, not a global one. So that gives me quite a lot of comfort.” Andrew Lyddon, a fund manager in the Schroders value team, has a similar perspective: “The UK is the cheapest large market in Europe by far,” he points out. “There are lots of reasons why its cheap, lots of uncertainty, but its also a very large market so there are many names you can pick amongst if you are a fundamental investor and find some really good bargains.” As Noffke points out, when starting from these valuations, UK equities have historically delivered highly attractive returns. Pessimism “Typically on a five- to 10-year view, you are looking at returns of double digits,” she says. “Now, history might not repeat itself, but I think those types of expectations do show how pessimistic investors are generally. What I see being priced in is the 25% to 40% chance of a UK recession and returns falling from 25%, and I think that is quite a good base from which to move forward.” In other words, there is already a margin of safety priced into the market. On top of which, the correlation between the performance of the economy and the stock market is not as clear as many investors might think. “It’s very important to remember that the UK stock market has very little representation of what the UK economy looks like,” Noffke says. “I think you can take quite a different view on equities while still subscribing to quite a difficult domestic economy.” The same argument can be made about the JSE. There may be good reasons for equity prices to have come down, but they are now presenting interesting valuations. “Political uncertainty can often throw up opportunities,” says Lyddon. “People often overreact to the risk.” Read: The sell-off and the opportunity Perhaps most tellingly is that both markets are also experiencing an increase in private investors buying out listed companies. “A lot of corporates have stepped into the UK market as retail and institutional investors have stepped back,” Noffke points out. “Partly that’s knowing the quality of the businesses and exploiting a valuation opportunity.” In South Africa, there have been a number of delistings recently. Clover Industries is also under a cautionary as it negotiates with a potential buyer. Read: What Clover is telling us about the state of the market This is often an indication that shares are trading at such depressed levels that private investors are seeing opportunities too good to miss. They are also not put off by the political noise. “It is interesting that corporates are taking a longer term view,” says Noffke. “They understand the value of these businesses.” Patrick Cairns attended the Schroders International Media Conference in London as a guest of Schroders. His travel and accommodation were covered by the host company.