The escalating trade war between the US and China has shone a spotlight on Chinese trade with the rest of the world. By the end of 2017, the US had imported roughly $505 billion in Chinese goods and shipped about $130 billion back, a difference of about $375 billion. China’s trade with other countries is, at best, similarly skewed, or even more skewed. Trade between China and South Africa sees South Africa exporting primary products and commodities to China and importing manufactured products from China. The imbalance was R87 billion in China’s favour at the end of 2017. Thus, much has been made of the First China International Import Expo (CIIE) held in Shanghai, China last week. President Xi Jinping kicked off the expo with a speech that promised to open the world’s second-largest economy to foreign players by, among other measures, lowering import tariffs and speeding up the opening of sectors such as telecommunications, education, and culture. “China, in opening its economy to foreign investment, is at a necessary stage of its economic development as it makes the structural shift to being a consumer economy,” says Tara O’Connor, executive director of Africa Risk Consulting. “Though it may appear a counter-intuitive response to US president Donald Trump’s economic nationalist, and protectionist approach.” South African officials also view this move as promising. “Exhibitions like the China International Import Expo [enable us to] display products, goods, and services that we can supply [to] the Chinese market,” Department of Trade and Industry minister Rob Davies said on the sidelines of the exhibition. However, not everyone believes that China’s public statements will translate directly into a welcoming environment for SA manufacturers and producers. Tariffs up ‘for no obvious reason’ If anything, trade with China has become more, not less, difficult over the last six months, says Martin Bergh, chairman of the SA Rooibos Council. “We have seen import tariffs on rooibos tea increase from 15% to 35%, for no obvious reason. “Chinese people consume a million tons of tea a year. Our whole industry produces 15 000 tons and we would export a maximum of 1 000 tons. SA is totally irrelevant in the scheme of things and in that context the tariffs make no sense.” Denan Kuni, the head of International Trade and Development at the Western Cape’s trade & investment agency Wesgro, says that China wants to correct its trade relationships, which have become a point of contention. “I think this is a step in the right direction,” he says. However countries like South Africa, which have not negotiated a free trade agreement with China, will continue to battle to gain access, he says. As a result, local industries like SA’s wine industry operate at a disadvantage to those that have free access, such as the Australian wine industry. The SA government is cautious about signing a free trade agreement, says Kuni, as it could result in a flood of cheaper Chinese goods into the market. “We saw what happen to the Western Cape textile industry.” Globally, among those calling for greater protection are Africa’s local manufacturers whose margins continue to suffer from China’s current fusion of state and private sector business interests, says O’Connor. By contrast, Africa’s major economies Nigeria, Kenya, Ghana, and South Africa are run on broadly free market principles where state and private sector operate separately. Dumping “I met and spoke to a manufacturer of consumer products in East Africa last week who complained that the exact same products manufactured in remote parts of China landed at ports in East Africa at a lower cost than local manufacturers could produce, thanks to China’s subsidised transport from factory to port, artificially low currency and interest rates. In the same way as steel is dumped in the US, China dumps consumer goods on African consumers.” All over Africa, local manufacturers struggle to compete with Chinese imports because of this dumping. Africa’s manufacturing capability remains embryonic as a result of three decades of economic liberalisation at the behest of the IMF, World Bank, and multilateral donors. However, O’Connor says, complaints to their governments for protection or any defence fall on deaf ears because of the scale of China’s debt diplomacy. Since 2000 the main avenue for China’s cheque-book diplomacy has been the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation (Focac) – the most recent of which took place on October 4 in Beijing. At this event, China famously pledged $60 billion worth of new financial support towards Africa, of which $5 billion is a special fund for imports from China – effectively a further subsidy for Chinese manufacturers! That said, no-one can argue against the enormous overall benefit of China’s $125 billion (2000-2016) investment in the continent, ousting the US as the continent’s main trading partner and becoming its main infrastructure partner. It is because of this investment, particularly in infrastructure, that many African economies are seeing the high growth levels they are seeing. However, says O’Connor, “if South Africa, Kenya, Nigeria, and Ghana are going to look to local manufacturing to create domestic jobs to stave off what one businessman described to me as a ‘demographic time bomb’, as well as benefit from this opening up in China to investment, they will have to get tough with China and demand a level playing field for their manufacturers.”