As Argentina deals with airline, subway and bus strikes, Buenos Aires is preparing to host the G-20 summit beginning Thursday in the aftermath of soccer fan violence. While River Plate and Boca Juniors supporters are wishing a lot of bad things on each other and waiting for the cancelled game to be rescheduled, investors are bracing for trade talks among the world’s top leaders. The summit is likely to be a key one for risk assets, according to Edward Park, deputy chief investment officer at Brooks Macdonald, a London-based firm with more than 10 billion pounds in assets under management. <a href="http://iono.fm/e/630252">Content hosted by iono.fm</a> Park sees the recent escalation in US trade rhetoric towards China as part of the “maximum pressure” doctrine that President Donald Trump has been using in negotiations since the beginning of his presidency, citing the build-up to other deals such as United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement and an accord with North Korea as examples. After his party lost control of the House of Representatives in the midterm elections, the US president will be keen to secure a big win and any progress in the negotiations is likely to have a positive impact on both Chinese and European manufacturing sectors. European industrials are still down 12% since the end of September after an aggressive sell-off, while autos & parts has been the European sector most affected by trade tensions. The deputy CIO believes that both parties have an interest in orchestrating a ceasefire. “China does not want escalating protectionism as it would have to abandon its economic realignment, while Trump does not want to be battling inflation in the US, with the monetary tightening it would probably provoke, when entering the 2020 election campaign,” Park wrote. Indeed, the other major event this Thursday will be the FOMC minutes. Recent dovish comments from Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell have hinted at a pause in rising interest rates. Some further details about the Fed’s position about inflation will likely be as crucial as a smooth G-20 summit for financial markets. The Euro Stoxx 50 futures are down 0.2% ahead of the open, with mixed markets in Asia and US futures lower. © 2018 Bloomberg L.P