Denel has just published its unaudited annual results for 2018 (overshooting the 30 September deadline). The director’s report and the audit committee report were published separately. Absent is the report of the auditor-general. In its media statement dated October 31, Denel says the auditor-general has given a disclaimer opinion. In my view there is nothing worse than the auditor-general not being able to give an opinion. This casts a pall over all the figures. Presumably the auditor-general will be reporting to Parliament in the near future, and we will be given more insight. Denel is deep in the mire. In April 2018 the Department of Trade and Industry replaced the old board of directors, appointing an interim board comprising Monhla Hlala (chair), Zoli Kunene, Professor Tshilidzi Marwala; General TT Matanzima, Gloria Serobe, Talib Sadiq, Sue Rabkin, Dr Sibusiso Sibisi, Cheryl Carolus, Nonzukiso Siyotula, Thami Magazi and Martin Mnisi. Their mandate includes: The new board has appointed a panel of forensic investigators to probe procurement irregularities, and is working with the Special Investigating Unit (SIU) to identify and root out any corruption. Time will tell as to whether anyone will be found guilty of corruption. There is also a process to unwind Denel Asia, and all contracts with Denel Asia have been terminated. One would hope that Parliament will request details of the “process to unwind Denel Asia”, the costs that have been incurred, and the future costs that will be incurred in unwinding this entity. Denel has also terminated all contracts with VR Laser. The figures paint a bleak picture Revenue for the year is down 38% to R4.9 billion (2017: R8 billion). The accumulated loss for 2018 is R5.2 billion (2017: R3.5 billion). The total comprehensive loss for the year net of tax is R1.7 billion (2017: profit of R282 million). Short and long term advance payments received (shown under liabilities) amount to R3.3 billion (2017: R3.6 billion); R1.4 billion must be settled within a year. Long term loans in 2018 also amount to R3.3 billion (2017: R3.3 billion), of which R2.4 billion is payable within a year. The government guarantee of R2.4 billion has been extended to R3.4 billion, terminating in September 2023. The debt portfolio includes government guaranteed commercial paper of R2.9 billion, and an unsecured note of R290 million. Irregular expenditure amounted to R513 million (2017: R116 million) and was mainly in regard to not following due process in instances of deviations from procurement processes. Finance costs for the year are R359 million (2017: R352 million). Denel cannot cover its obligations to employees and suppliers with receipts from customers. In 2018 it fell short by R716 million (2017: positive cash flow of R376 million). However, this is before the settlement of advance payments (these appear to be similar to a loan), finance costs, and capital repayments of loans. The repayments of interest-bearing borrowings was R4.8 billion (2017: R2.1 billion), and new interest-bearing borrowings amounted to R4.8 billion (2017: R1.6 billion). Cash and short term deposits as at March 31, 2018 amounted to R1.3 billion (2017: R2 billion). But as we all know, this did not last long. Government considers Denel to be a strategic national asset, playing a critical role in maintaining South Africa’s defence capabilities, and in technological and economic development. I wasn’t aware that we were fighting any wars on our permeable borders, but perhaps Denel should divert some of its technological brilliance to a more economically rewarding venture such as preventing cash-in-transit heists. So far, Denel has shown itself to be an exceedingly costly ‘asset’, unable to sustain itself. South Africa is ranked 21st on the list of world arms exporters, and has only a 0.2% share of arms exports per the recently published ‘Trends In International Arms Transfers‘ report by the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute. Denel claims that it has a substantial order book of around R15 billion, but that it is suffering from severe cash constraints. How uncanny, the lack of cash resources is the lament of many of our parastatals. Of primary concern is whether Denel can continue conducting business as a going concern in the foreseeable future. Can it generate enough cash from operations to fund its operating expenses, cover the finance costs on its loans and meet its loan repayment obligations? To me, the answer is obvious. And perhaps this is the reason for the delayed publishing of the audit report.