U.S stocks halted a three-day rally as investors awaited developments in the trade war and assessed the impact of falling Treasury rates. The S&P 500 fell following the biggest rally in eight months Wednesday that was fueled by a dovish tone from Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell, and banks paced the decline. The 10-year Treasury yield dropped to the lowest level in two months, while the dollar slid for a second day ahead of a sit-down between Presidents Donald Trump and Xi Jinping that could be pivot point in the trade war between the two countries. In Europe, shares and bonds rose, while the pound fell as U.K. Prime Minister Theresa May raised the prospect of a “ no deal” Brexit. Deutsche Bank AG slid after prosecutors said its headquarters were being searched in a money laundering probe. After Powell’s comment that interest rates are “just below” a range of estimates of the so-called neutral level, investors are now betting the Fed is nearing a pause. With Powell now out of the way, the market is looking for any hopeful signals on trade from a meeting between the U.S. and Chinese presidents that will take place at the Group of 20 summit in Buenos Aires this weekend. “The next catalyst will be the G-20 meeting between Trump and Xi; we believe risk assets will tactically trade in the green following a tariff cease-fire,” said Eleanor Creagh, a strategist at Saxo Capital Markets in Sydney. “A tradeable risk bounce on a paper deal at G-20 will be unlikely to reverse sentiment structurally as the underlying U.S.-China relationship is still deteriorating.” Elsewhere, emerging-market equities rose to the highest level since early October. West Texas oil tumbled below $50 a barrel for the first time in more than a year before swinging to a gain on reports Russia accepts the need for production cuts. Terminal subscribers can read our Markets Live blog. Coming Up Trump and Chinese President Xi Jinping plan to meet at the G-20 meeting of world leaders in Argentina that kicks off on Friday. Thursday sees the release of the minutes from the Federal Open Market Committee’s November meeting.These are the main moves in markets: Stocks The S&P 500 Index fell 0.3% as of 9:30 a.m. New York time. The Stoxx Europe 600 Index rose 0.4%. The U.K’s FTSE 100 Index gained 0.7% to the highest in more than two weeks. Germany’s DAX Index increased 0.3%. The MSCI Emerging Market Index jumped 0.8% to the highest in almost eight weeks. The MSCI Asia Pacific Index increased 0.8% to the highest in three weeks on the biggest climb in two weeks. Currencies The Bloomberg Dollar Spot Index fell 0.1%. The euro climbed 0.2% to $1.1394, the strongest in a week. The British pound declined 0.4% to $1.2778. The Japanese yen rose 0.4% to 113.27 per dollar, the biggest advance in almost two weeks. Bonds The yield on 10-year Treasuries fell three basis points to 3.02%. Germany’s 10-year yield fell three basis points to 0.32%, the lowest in more than 14 weeks. Britain’s 10-year yield dipped four basis points to 1.335%, the lowest in more than three months.Commodities
West Texas Intermediate crude increased 1.7% to $51.16 a barrel. Gold rose 0.2% to $1,232.70 an ounce.  © 2018 Bloomberg L.P