Most South Africans want a secure guaranteed income for the rest of their life once they retire, but many also want to leave money to the family if they pass away. This is one of the key themes that have emerged from a tracking study conducted by Freshly Ground Insights. The study is based on face-to-face interviews with 345 South Africans between the ages of 55 and 85 living in major metropolitan areas. It was conducted in July and August. Sixty-one percent of respondents were still working while 39% were retired. The research was commissioned by Just South Africa following a similar study in 2015. According to the study, 89% of respondents would prefer a secure, guaranteed income in retirement, up slightly from 86% in 2015. More than a third said they couldn’t afford to lose any of their retirement capital as it would seriously affect their retirement plans. This was particularly prevalent where respondents’ monthly household income was less than R6 000. Source: Just Retirement Insights While most respondents consider themselves to be good with financial planning, two-thirds have not done any calculations around how much money they would need annually in retirement and say they will pay attention to it closer to retirement. Less than one in five used the services of a financial advisor, while 21% relied on their human resources department for assistance. Relatives, friends, trustees or people working in the financial services industry were also regular sources of advice. On the issue of fees, about 35% said they could do it themselves, while 27% said it was too costly to look for advice. Spousal support? On average, respondents expect to live to the age of 81 themselves and for their partners (those who have partners) to live to age 80. Females generally expect to die before their male counterparts (79 compared to 83) but data from the Actuarial Society of South Africa suggests that the average life expectancy of a 65-year-old female is 87 compared to 83 for males. At the same time, the research suggests a significant proportion of married males do not consider supporting the financial needs of their spouse as a priority. Bjorn Ladewig, a longevity actuary at Just, says this is concerning as women generally have older male spouses, but are also expected to live longer than their male counterparts on average. This means there is a risk that a lot of women could be left destitute in their old age. Less than a third of people have thought about dementia or Alzheimer’s disease or made plans to protect their financial future should they be afflicted by these conditions. Dementia is estimated to affect one in 20 people over the age of 65 worldwide, and one in five over the age of 80. Ladewig says while there are long-term care products available for these situations, they are generally not well-known or popular in South African and are quite expensive. Yet it is important not only to consider the financial implications but to ensure that the necessary structures are in place. South Africa does not recognise enduring power of attorney, and where a person no longer has the capacity to manage their own financial affairs due to dementia or Alzheimer’s they would not be able to provide someone with a power of attorney to act on their behalf. The research also highlights that while 40% of respondents have less than R1 million in retirement savings, many people likely underestimate their expenses in retirement. Thirty-eight percent say they do not spend anything on accommodation and 24% say they do not spend anything on medical expenses. Asked who they would turn to if their retirement capital ran out, most people said children or family members. Source: Just Retirement Insights With about 90% of South Africans choosing living annuities in retirement, other research suggesting that only about 6% of South Africans can maintain their standard of living in retirement, and warnings that many will run out of money in retirement, there has been a growing polarisation around whether living annuities or life annuities are the most appropriate vehicles for most retirees. New default regulations that will require retirement funds to implement a default annuity strategy by March 1, 2019, have put pressure on trustees to come up with a solution that would be suitable for most of their members. With a living annuity, the investor carries the longevity as well as the investment risk but can draw up to 17.5% per annum, allowing a higher initial monthly income, but also a much higher probability of running out of money after a few years. With a guaranteed (life) annuity, the pensioner receives a guaranteed income for life, regardless of how long they live, but they cannot leave money to family members when they pass away. Just CEO Deane Moore says rather than choosing one or the other, it may be more helpful for individuals to divide their retirement money into two buckets where one bucket is used to provide a sustainable income that can cover basic expenses (food, accommodation and medical expenses) for life, while the other can be used for unexpected expenses, to fund holidays and to leave a legacy if there is money left. In this way, retirees can effectively combine a life and living annuity within a single hybrid solution.