The Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) manages Transnet, Alexkor, SA Express, Denel, Eskom and Safcol on behalf of government. It has filed its annual report for 2018, even though Alexkor, SA Express, Denel and Safcol have failed to complete theirs. Denel did publish 2018 ‘financials’, but without the audit report. This renders them meaningless. The DPE annual report doesn’t give an indication of the profitability nor the going concern status of these state-owned enterprises (SOEs), disclosing only the ‘value’ of its investment in each – which hasn’t changed in the year under review: Investments in SOEs 2018 2017 R’million R’million Alexkor 400 400 Denel 6 176 6 176 Eskom 83 000 83 000 Safcol 318 318 Transnet 12 661 12 661 SA Express 585 585 103 140 103 140 The strategic objectives, performance indicators, planned targets and actual achievements of Denel, Alexkor, Safcol and SA Express set out on pages 33 to 40 of the report are absolutely meaningless, as these SOEs have not yet produced audited financial statements for 2018. It is also exceedingly disappointing that the report has no strategies to “overcome areas of non-performance”. Perhaps forensic audits of endemic corruption are underway, perhaps not. Transnet, though it wasted billions on irregular, fruitless and wasteful expenditure, and suffered corruption at the hands of officials, managed to make a profit of R4.9 billion in 2018 (2017: R2.8 billion). Its irregular expenditure for the year amounted to R8.1 billion (2017: R692 million), and fruitless and wasteful expenditure for the year amounted to R23.5 million (2017: R22 million). Total losses through criminal conduct amounted to R59.1 million (2017: R43.1 million). The auditors couldn’t verify the figures. There is material uncertainty as to whether Transnet can meet the going concern test. Read: Transnet could be derailed by audit report, reportable irregularities Eskom incurred a total comprehensive loss of R5.6 billion for 2018 (2017: R6.4 billion), and the group’s current liabilities exceed its current assets by R20.6 billion. Irregular, fruitless and wasteful expenditure amounted to R20.7 billion (2017: R4.4 billion). The audit report stated that Eskom did not have “adequate internal control systems to identify, investigate and record all information as required by the PFMA [Public Finance Management Act]”. Read: South Africa’s energy colossus lurches on Most of these SOEs do not have proper procedures relating to supply chain management, performance management, revenue, compliance, and related internal controls. It is a travesty that taxpayer money should be wasted on keeping them afloat and paying for inept board members and executives. Paper promises The DPE is of the view that it has ensured SOE financial stability because in 2017 it developed the “capital structure optimisation strategy” and in 2018 it prepared a “draft paper on investment and funding”. No, DPE – this doesn’t go anywhere near ensuring their financial stability. No organisation, other than a government one, would be allowed to haphazardly continue wasting investors’ money without even bothering to furnish financial statements. The DPE is to take a leading role in developing government’s shareholder oversight policy. Whatever oversight policy is in place is clearly ineffective. Minister Pravin Gordhan’s foreword to the DPE 2018 annual report was harsh; no pussy footing around the problems faced: most SOEs are “on the brink of financial collapse and operationally deficient because of state capture”. The minister gives thanks to parliament’s oversight committees. However, in my view their understanding of financial statements and the role of internal auditors versus external auditors could be much improved. Baby steps. We can be thankful that they are raising questions. In my opinion, the auditor-general has been performing a stellar role in carrying out audits on an often shoddy set of financials and issuing qualified audit reports. Worryingly, government will be investing R368 billion in SOEs over the next three years, of which Transnet and Eskom will receive a significant share. Surely no SOE should receive a cent until they have a proper accounting system, an efficient internal audit team, and rigorous risk and governance controls. Further, charge those corrupt officials. Pie-in-the-sky dreaming There is some pie-in-the-sky dreaming, in that South Africa can look forward to a “cost-effective electricity supply, and efficient freight logistics and port infrastructure. New energy capacity will be built, ports and rail infrastructure will be upgraded, and our industrial defence capability will be further developed”. I am not sure what “industrial defence capability” is. Perhaps what was meant is “defence industry capability”? Gordhan is intent on “conducting forensics and ensuring consequence management” and boards and executive management will be held to account when performance standards, ethics and corporate governance collapse. The new boards are to “address the malaise, the depth of corruption and criminal behaviour that seems to have become endemic in these institutions”. Appointing new boards is the first step. However, it will take a long time to overturn the internal appointments and promotions of inept unqualified people. Gordhan has a tough task ahead of him. When he became commissioner of Sars and, 10 years later, minister of finance, he was surrounded by skilled and dedicated public servants. And Sars and National Treasury were at the top of their game. Sluggish versus sharp Over the next year we should see sluggish inept officials crumbling before his steely gaze and sharp questioning. They are warned to start upping their game. Sadly, getting these zombie SOEs back on their feet will cost taxpayers dearly. The DPE should provide explanations and updates for the following: Public officials who are found guilty of fraud should not only be jailed, they should be forced to provide community services to our poorest sectors for the rest of their lives. Their earnings from corrupt activities should be confiscated by the state, and they should never be allowed to be appointed at another government or municipal organisation, as has happened in the past. The DPE’s oversight of SOEs until March 2018 amounted to a dismal performance, and failed to ensure that the SOEs complied with the Public Finance Management Act 1 of 1999 (PFMA). It is also somewhat galling to read that there is sufficient energy in the country during a massive current power outage. Under Gordhan’s leadership, we can expect some sparks to fly.