Hotelier and casino operator Tsogo Sun posted flat half-year profits, as economic pressures on consumers and massive spending on acquisitions for the six months ended September 30, 2018 dimmed earnings per share. Despite income rising 21% and earnings before interest, income tax, depreciation, amortisation (Ebitda) increasing 14% to R2.5 billion, adjusted Heps remained unchanged at 78.8 cents. The South African hotelier and casino operator, however, reaffirmed its growth strategy with R1.2 billion spent during the period on the expansion and refurbishment of the Suncoast Casino and Entertainment World. The group’s total income increased by 21% up from the period prior to R7.7 billion. This was buoyed by gaming revenue, which increased 34% following the Niveus Invest acquisition. This saw Tsogo acquire Vukani Gaming, a supplier of limited payout machines, and Galaxy Bingo, an operator of electronic bingo terminals, from Niveus. The deal became effective in November 2017. The group saw 3% growth in hotel room revenue and a 6% growth in food and beverage revenue. The overall group Ebitda margin, however, dropped 1.9 percentage points to 32.5% attributed to the VAT hike, which came into effect on April 1. In addition, the group reported exceptional losses for the six months following revaluation losses of investment properties related to non-Tsogo leased hotels. “Exceptional losses for the six months of R136 million relate mainly to fair value losses on the revaluation of investment properties of R119 million related to the non-Tsogo leased hotels in HPF, restructure costs of R6 million, transaction costs of R32 million,” says Tsogo Sun CEO Jacques Booysen. While Tsogo management continues to look at other opportunities, they remain mindful of the fact that the group’s debt levels were higher. The latest results confirm the credit pressure as interest-bearing debt net of cash by September 30 totalled R13.3 billion, which is R767 million above the March 31 balance. Despite the group’s debt obligations rising, Tsogo’s interim dividend was up 312.5% to 132 cents per share but Booysen admitted a need to review the dividend policy moving forward. “It has become apparent during recent interactions with our shareholders that they are in favour of increased cash distributions. In light of the pending completion of the group’s last major expansion project, being the Suncoast development, and the fact that the group continues to be highly cash-generative, a decision has been taken to substantially increase the interim dividend,” he says. “The group’s dividend policy will be reviewed taking into account cash generation and major capital expenditure or investment opportunities.” Only last week, Tsogo called off the disposal of seven mixed-use casino properties to the Hospitality Property Fund, which would in effect commence the unbundling of its holding of Hospitality Property Fund shares to Tsogo shareholders. Although South Africa’s sentiment has marginally improved from a political perspective, this is yet to spur consumption in the recreation space. “The improved sentiment arising from the positive political developments has not yet translated into a significant improvement in trading, although casino gaming win showed good growth during August and September on the prior period,” Booysen said in a statement. Delayed regulator approvals Tsogo paid R95 million for the purchase of Niveus in the six months to September 2018 as part of the common control acquisition of selected gaming businesses from Niveus. However, troubled Niveus, which owns the Grand Oasis Casino Kuruman has previously endured operational challenges, as approvals from the Northern Cape Gambling Board were slower than expected. “As these approvals had not been obtained by March 31, 2018, this payment was accounted for as a prepayment. The approval was subsequently obtained on 15 June 2018,” says Booysen. Meanwhile, the deal’s exclusion from Tsogo’s financials translated to an income gap on the latest interim results. “Excluding the funding(’s) impact, had the acquisition occurred on April 1, the group’s income would have increased by R14 million with no impact to adjusted earnings,” says Booysen.