We are rapidly reaching the end of the year, and with it comes the anniversary of Steinhoff’s share price collapse due to accounting irregularities. Billions were wiped off the Johannesburg Stock Exchange. This year has shown us the importance of good corporate governance, as a slew of once-popular stocks (and politicians) became fallen angels. In a series of articles carried by Moneyweb, asset manager Cratos Capital is taking a closer look at the missteps made by investors, asset managers included. =As the writer observed in the first article in the series: “As asset managers, we have to be better at spotting the loser before it takes the next leg down.” Part 1 of the fallen angels series looks at the collapse of Steinhoff. Part 2 looks at the cases of Aspen and EOH and Part 3 looks at the Resilient stable. Today we consider what it takes to buy at the bottom of a cycle. It’s only when the tide goes out that you learn who’s been swimming naked The above quote is a favourite of Warren Buffett. He uses it to remind investors not to overpay for shares. The bull run is ending. The quantitative easing experiment by the US Federal Reserve is over, and quantitative tightening is taking its place. This move to ‘normalisation’ – the tide receding, so to speak – is what’s driving the market derating. Global economic growth has been revised downward by the IMF, and monetary and fiscal support is petering out. Investors are seeing momentum-investing dissipating and value-investing taking its place. As an aside, both these styles just happen to be a nifty way for asset managers to convince clients to buy stocks. Buy because shares are running and you don’t want to miss out, and buy when stocks are retreating, because you’re getting better value for your money. You’ll never hear an asset manager saying it’s not the right time to purchase shares! Traditionally, economics says that when interest rates go up, the stock market goes down. This time has not been different. Adding to this is US fiscal policy stimulus (US tax cuts for corporates), which is filtering through earnings and may cause an inflation overshoot, forcing the Fed to raise rates even quicker than expected. Global equities standing on tiny toddler legs The recent emerging market rout is the beginning of this pullback from risky emerging market equities to less risky developed market stocks and other even less risky instruments. As the Fed raises the risk-free interest rate, even developed market equities will eventually be considered too risky to hold onto. Historically this occurs when the US 10-year bond yields are closer to 5%. They are currently at 3.1%. The 5% level has resulted in a market correction or crash in the past. If that happens, economies, sovereigns, and companies will again need rescuing. Monetary and fiscal stimulus will be deployed, and the cycle will begin again. How long can global equities stand on tiny toddler legs without the crutches of monetary or fiscal accommodation, before the next correction or crash? I watched a google talk by Lauren Templeton, the great-niece of famed value investor Sir John M Templeton. It’s worth watching if you haven’t seen it. She said that when a correction or crash occurs, she refers to her list of top stocks to own but which have always been too expensive. As Warren Buffett says, “be greedy when others are fearful and fearful when others are greedy”. Of course, waiting for the next crash could take years, and if you are holding cash, may result in lost opportunity. Pundits feel the next crash will be shallow but prolonged; wok-shaped, some have said, not v-shaped as in the past. The economic trade-off when investing is time in the market versus timing the market. However, does one reach for the marshmallows a decade after the last financial crisis, or does one hoard cash as prices continue to fall, lying in wait, ready to pounce? Have you heard about the marshmallow test? Put a marshmallow in front of a child and tell them they can have a second one if they wait 15 minutes before eating the first, then leave the room. Whether the child is patient enough to double their payout is supposedly indicative of a willpower that will pay dividends down the line, at school and eventually at work. Passing the test is, to many, a promising signal of future success. Patience is a virtue. The study was recently redone and found that rich kids are raised to understand that they will get later, so they are able to wait. Less affluent kids know from experience that luxuries are not a certainty and so they don’t wait. Why are the rich able to buy stocks when they are inexpensive? Because they have the patience (and money) to wait for a time when shares are mispriced. They have faith that their patience will be rewarded. You might be wondering which category of patience you fall into as a human being, but the more important question to ask is what kind of asset manager you have. Trade spat Another variable causing consternation in the markets is President Donald Trump’s trade war with China. Trump very recently became much more positive about reaching an agreement on this. It just happened to be ahead of the November US midterm elections. Lower wealth because of falling stock markets tends to be a bit of a dampener on voter turnout for the incumbent’s party – and certainly wouldn’t look good on election day. The spat threatens to increase input costs for US firms who use certain Chinese products by 25%. For now, they’re facing an 11% increase in import tariffs, but Trump vowed to increase these to 25% after the elections. There is no end in sight to this fight because we don’t know if Trump will flip-flop after the elections. China will continue to reciprocate with tariffs of its own. The US has far more bargaining power than China, so Trump can drag the matter on for as long as he likes. Between monetary normalisation, the US tariff war with China, and the Zuma administration’s destructive decade imposed on the South African economy, local equities are out of vogue. The dollar has strengthened as the emerging-market carry trade unwinds and investors seek safe havens from the trade war. The recent slump has caused me to reconsider the suggestion that one hold 100% offshore allocation of stocks. The numbers over the medium term seem to confirm this. A wise friend at Cratos pointed out that over the last five years the JSE Top 40 index has returned -22% in dollar terms but a positive 14% in rands. The Dow Jones, on the other hand, has returned 63% in dollars over the same period, and 141% in rand terms. South African equities make up around 0.4% of global stocks, so why allocate most of your portfolio to this jurisdiction? Local shares actually need to be an afterthought when constructing client portfolios (depending on mandate limits). Why do asset managers place so much emphasis on the local bourse then? Casting a wider net has seen our offshore holdings rescue many a client portfolio from the grips of poor overall performance in recent times. Thank goodness for diversification. Given this outlook, we will cautiously continue to look for value locally while expanding our selection of offshore stocks, at the right levels. For those who are unaware, a correction is a fall in stock prices of 10% or more. By this metric South Africa has already experienced a correction this year. Price-earnings ratios show that local stocks are historically cheap – but if earnings deteriorate further, maybe they’re not cheap enough yet. Lee Kern is an assistant portfolio manager at Cratos Capital.