Listed financial services group Efficient is working on five acquisition opportunities involving advisory businesses with assets of between R500 million and R1.5 billion. “There are a lot of opportunities out there,” CEO Heiko Weidhase said at the group’s annual results presentation, but indicated that capacity was a hindrance. “We need more people to help us work on those transactions.” Efficient understands the businesses and can safely integrate them into the group, he added. Efficient suffered an after-tax loss of R288 million in the financial year through August after it cancelled a five-year profit share agreement with Robert Walton, who managed Boutique Collective Investments (BCI) and Boutique Investment Partners (BIP) under the Efficient Invest banner from 2013. The transaction was accounted for as an expense in the group’s income statement. Although the transaction value of R480 million is more than the group’s market cap of around R400 million, management has indicated that it is comfortable with the deal since it knows the parties and businesses and has acquired the full earnings generated by BCI and BIP. BCI is a co-branded collective investment scheme provider while BIP is an independent retail multi-management company. Group revenue rose to R1.1 billion from R1 billion year-on-year, while recurring headline earnings per share (excluding the impact of the cancellation) fell from 41.22 cents to 39.85 cents. Apart from the cancellation agreement, key focus areas also included the vertical integration of its financial services, solutions and investment cluster. While Efficient’s footprint is largely concentrated around the Western Cape, Eastern Cape and Gauteng, Weidhase says it is building a national distribution business. “We do a lot of business in the rural areas. There are, in our opinion, huge opportunities and the strategy is there to be able to service people where they live.” Bigger corporates used to have a strong presence in these regions, but this has changed, and the group has taken the opportunity to position itself in these market segments. Advice The financial services cluster has gradually increased the number of financial advisors from 84 in 2014 to the current 234. The Financial Sector Conduct Authority is still ironing out the finer details of the Retail Distribution Review (RDR), which deals with the remuneration of financial advisors among other issues. Rudi Barnard, managing director of Efficient Wealth, says at this stage, the proposal is to have registered financial advisors (RFAs) and product supplier agents (PSAs). The main difference is that RFAs are not tied to any specific product provider. Although the company currently has 27 tied agents on its books related to a previous transaction, it has positioned itself to play in the RFA area. Most of its advisors (170) are remunerated according to a revenue model, where there is a revenue split with the advisor. While this model is not as profitable as the profit model (the group has 37 advisors who fall in this bucket), it is easier to manage as the advisors take responsibility for their own day-to-day expenses. “The profit model is much more profitable, but obviously capital and resource intensive, and I think going forward there is definitely a shift in our business towards the profit model where it makes sense.” In rural areas, the revenue model makes more sense as it is not possible to invest in bricks and mortar in every small town, he adds. Weidhase acknowledged that the performance of financial markets has been horrible and that there hasn’t been a decent tailwind for balanced funds for four years, but said that when markets turn it will have a meaningful impact on the bottom line. Responding to rumours that he has retired after the cancellation of the profit-share agreement, Walton said they were a small team and had about 100 partners, but this was his family. “Sometimes you fight with your in-laws and stuff, but it is still your family. You take care of your family, so we are not going anywhere,” he quipped. Walton and his team continue to focus on growing the same businesses but have also expanded their focus to the wider group. As part of the new deal they have negotiated a five-year remuneration agreement and he has agreed to a 10-year restraint of trade.