The share price of open-pit mining group Afrimat was unchanged at R27 on Thursday following the publication of interim results that proved the value of its diversification strategy. The share has gained 5.39% in value over the last month and was trading 5.26% lower than a year ago Listen: Afrimat half-year revenue driven by iron ore Afrimat recorded a 28.6% increase in revenue in the six months ended August 31 to R1.5 billion, compared to the first half of the previous financial year. Operating profit grew by 4.3% to R202.7 million and headline earnings per share (Heps) declined by 8.4% to 93.6c. The group declared an interim dividend of 19c per share, compared to 20c in the first half of the previous financial year. Since listing on the JSE during the construction boom in 2006/7 Afrimat has evolved from a construction materials group producing aggregates, ready-mix and concrete products, to a diversified open-pit mining group that also produces industrial minerals and now bulk commodities. During the reporting period, that diversification was Afrimat’s saving grace. The construction material segment of the group felt the pressures of the economic slowdown, which has seen big construction groups on the brink of bankruptcy. According to Afrimat CEO Andries van Heerden, the KwaZulu-Natal and Gauteng operations suffered most and, as a result, the KwaZulu-Natal business has embarked on a restructuring. While the external revenue of the construction materials segment remained more or less flat at R870 million, its contribution to revenue shrank from almost 74% in the previous comparative period to 57.1%. The margin shrank from almost 17% to 13.2% due to the challenging market conditions. The big growth was in bulk commodities, which currently consists only of the Demaneng iron ore mine in the Northern Cape. The mine’s contribution to external revenue increased 2.4% or R29 million in the first half of the previous financial year to 24.2% or R368 million in the reporting period. This is due to the ramping up of the operations after Afrimat bought it out of business rescue. Van Heerden says all processes were recommissioned and the group expanded its rail load-out facility. “Our ability to scale up or down quickly is a particular advantage in the iron ore business, meaning we can adapt quickly to any change in the market.” Van Heerden expects the bulk commodities operating margin of 13.6% to expand in the second half of the financial year. He says the industrial minerals segment gave a solid performance with external revenue increasing marginally to R284 million. Its contribution to external revenue shrank from almost 23% to almost 18% as bulk commodities were ramped up. Van Heerden says the group expects the current difficult market conditions to continue and will therefore focus on the successful implementation of its diversification strategy. Management will focus on ensuring that new acquisitions operate well, and will also assess further opportunities that fit the group’s criteria. “New business development remains a key component of our strategy, and the dedicated business development team continues to successfully identify and pursue opportunities in existing markets, as well as in anticipated new high growth areas in southern Africa.”