Just as Vitality (health) is premised on “making people healthier and live longer”, Vitality Money – the foundation of Discovery’s new banking offering – is grounded in behaviour analytics. In a white paper released at the unveiling of Discovery Bank on Wednesday it contends that there are five controllable behaviours, which “left unmanaged, are linked to three risks that lead to 80% of the reasons why individuals do not meet their financial obligations”. (The remaining 20% are exogenous factors, like a stock market crash, over which the average person has no control.) The five behaviours the bank is focused on: Sounds like common sense, except the white paper points to a raft of data that demonstrates South Africans are struggling on practically all five. The fact that few South Africans have enough income in retirement is fairly well-accepted. So too, the savings gap. Discovery cites two stats from the 2018 Old Mutual Savings & Investment Monitor: Discovery says the five behaviours, if unmanaged, lead to three risks: The bank’s mission to change these behaviours will, it believes, “have a significant impact on people’s financial health”. It argues that the “hurdles that need to be overcome to get individuals to make better financial decisions are not too dissimilar to those we face in encouraging healthier lifestyles or more responsible driving, and similar behavioural models apply”. It provides some insight into how it scores the five behaviours, as well as how people become more financially secure the more engaged they are. Source: Banking for a Stronger South Africa It may be tempting to argue that this is all theoretical or that Discovery has used irrelevant data from studies in overseas markets. However, it has access to real, relevant data. In notes to the white paper, it says two measures of ‘financial health’ have been used throughout: Its cardholder base is 300 000, meaning this is a significant sample. It says that its research, together with other studies, confirms that a “few simple changes in behaviour can have a big impact”. For example, “individuals who save regularly and have emergency savings of at least three months’ income, have a financial health score of 63 – 15 points higher than individuals who do not save. Similar results are seen when comparing individuals who manage their spending (a score of 55 versus 43 for those who do not)”. Importantly, the white paper also makes the critical point that “financial health is less about how much you earn and more about how you manage your money … The distribution of measures of financial health by income groups are wide and overlap substantially, highlighting that a person’s financial health does not only depend on earnings”. It says its findings are “consistent with those from the Consumer Protection Bureau in the United States and ANZ [Australia and New Zealand Banking Group]”. Source: Banking for a Stronger South Africa It has sampled its Discovery base too, in order to get a better understanding of why people miss debt repayments. In a random sample, 47% of respondents said they had missed debt repayments because of an “unplanned expense”, 39% because they “forgot”, 25% due to “job loss”, 17% “irresponsible spending”, 6% failed to allow for an interest rate change, and a further 6% self-reported the reason as “other”. The trick, of course, is to ensure the rewards and incentives offered by the bank actually change behaviour. In a book chronicling the evolution of Discovery Bank, Vitality UK CEO Neville Koopowitz says: “You can have the most scientific programme in the world but, if you don’t provide the right incentives, people are not going to change.” The bank believes the dynamic discounts and rewards that will be offered by Vitality Money as part of the chassis’ shared-value model are compelling enough. Group chief executive Adrian Gore says the dynamic pricing of interest rates is “transparent, equitable, efficient, and controllable, with no cross-subsidies”. Applying the shared-value model to banking is simple: the incentives drive behavioural change, which results in clients who are healthier financially. This, in turn, should translate to increased deposits (as well as greater persistency, improved product usage) and lower defaults. It’s this latter point that is key to the actual business of banking. Discovery is effectively expecting that it will be able to more correctly access and price default risk by using its Vitality model. Speaking at the media launch on Wednesday, Gore said: “If we get [Vitality Money] right” – quickly adding that he believed the group would – “we [would]’ve segmented clients based on their default risk.” If Vitality has been proven to work for health, life and car insurance, why wouldn’t it work for banking? We’ll know in a year or five. * Hilton Tarrant works at YFM. He can still be contacted at hilton@moneyweb.co.za