An extraordinary general meeting called by ‘dissident’ shareholders of Grand Parade Investments (GPI) became properly extraordinary last night when shareholders representing less than 20% of votes voted by a show of hands to adjourn the meeting, held at the Samaj Community Centre in Athlone. Shareholders representing 80% of possible votes had already voted by proxy. Even more extraordinary is the fact that a good deal of the collected shareholders, many of whom helped fund the start-up of GPI twenty years ago, are clearly dissatisfied with the performance of GPI, and the board in particular, and made this quite clear. To add to the Alice-in-Wonderland tone of the evening, executive chairman Hassen Adams, who previously dubbed the meeting a ‘hostile takeover by yuppies who are gambling with blue-collar money’ was nowhere to be seen. According to FD Colin Priem he took ill on Wednesday afternoon. Following years of solid returns and equally solid dividends from its investments in GrandWest and Worcester Casinos, GPI took a fork in the road and entered the fast food business, investing in international chains Burger King, Dunkin’ Donuts, and Baskin-Robbins alongside a meat processing plant and other smaller operations. Since 2013 it is estimated that capital expenditure plus losses incurred by the foods division add up to about R1.4 billion, well north of GPI’s market capitalisation of just over R1 billion. At the same time, the share price declined from its high of R7.50 in 2014 to R2.22 yesterday. Institutional shareholders – including Denker Capital, Kagiso Asset Management, Westbrooke Alternative Asset Management, Rozendal Partners and Excelsia Capital – have engaged over the last 18 months with the chairman about governance concerns, poor results and the departure of two CEOs as well as a chief financial officer and the CEO of Burger King SA. They proposed the board be strengthened with four new board members who would bring operational expertise to the group. Adams, who suspected a plot to unseat him, resisted all efforts at change. And so it came to be that the shareholders, who only hold 12.5% of GPI’s shares, requested an extraordinary general meeting to give all shareholders the opportunity to vote for the proposed independent directors, who they said would deepen the skills and independent oversight of the board. In addition, they proposed that existing non-executive directors be put forward for re-election to reinstate good corporate governance. The meeting was interrupted before Priem, who chaired the proceedings, could even put the first five resolutions to the vote. First up was non-executive director Alex Abercrombie, an attorney and former judge of the Cape High Court. “Voting on these resolutions would be irregular … as we [the non-executive directors] have not been given reasons as to our removal and have not been given an opportunity to respond. We reserve our rights.” The reasons the board needs to be replaced, said Gavin Cooper, an ordinary shareholder in the audience, is that you have overseen the devaluation of the stock and the acquisition of companies that are loss-making. “My concern,” added George February, also from the audience, “is that you are asking me to vote on removing people. But I have put my hard-earned money into this company. I want to understand what is happening here tonight. Is there a hostile takeover?” While the chairman attempted to restart the voting process, the assembled shareholders clamoured to be heard. One shareholder, who described himself as ‘the youngest person here’ and later told journalist Ann Crotty that he was a huge fan of activist shareholder Theo Botha, got hold of the mic. “The reason we are here is that our investment into Grand Parade is subsidising their investment into Dunkin’ Donuts and all these other high sugar foods. We took on McDonald’s when our share price was R8 and now it’s R2 … all the dividends from gaming are being thrown into a bottomless pit … I’m not saying gaming is good … but it is where we went. It was to empower ourselves. And now the chairman is not even here.” At this point, Jarred Winer, a fund manager at Westbrooke, attempted to explain the reasons behind the meeting but was halted by Abercrombie. “I object. This is the first time I have met this man and we [the non-executives] haven’t been given reasons …” “No,” shouted another shareholder. “It’s you as directors who are out of order. You are not fooling me. You are working with my money and you as the board have a fiduciary duty.” William Samuels in the audience then stood up. “You are ignoring me,” he told the chairman. “Shareholders want reasons why they should vote. These have not been clearly explained. I propose we adjourn this meeting so this can be communicated.” He sat down, proclaiming: “This is a hostile takeover.” At this point, the chairman and a phalanx of lawyers departed the room to consult. They returned saying the motion would be allowed if it was seconded. It was, by George February. And so, despite clear unhappiness with the performance of GPI, the audience voted overwhelmingly to support the motion. The institutional shareholders who argue that they are acting in the interests of all shareholders have vowed to continue the battle. “On the positive side, community shareholders feel exactly the same – frustrated and angry,” says Ricco Friedrich, director, and fund manager at Denker Capital. “We will come back harder with the support of the community and get this done.”