Our beloved South Africa is experiencing what young people these days describe as going through ‘the most’, which means something is negatively more than what was expected or can be tolerated. This applies in both the economic and political sense, and the latter is proving to have the upper hand – at least that’s the impression we are getting from testimonies at the Zondo Commission of Inquiry. Mind you, what is currently playing out on centre stage, in full view of the public, teaches us important lessons. It has revealed to many how the degeneracy of the political elite and their intoxication with power has absolutely corrupted some of them. For the ruling ANC, its leaders’ debauched proclivities display the clay feet of those who fashioned themselves as serving the people when they turned out to be helping themselves to the gravy. In many ways, it is these ‘it’s our time to eat’ and ‘eatist’ tendencies that have reduced state organs to failed ones and a government to one that is unable to serve the people. The most instructive observation is that without principled leaders, opportunistic politicians will rise to power; they will plunder, destroy institutions and, as consequence, devastate the economy. In all of this, the first lesson that escapes our leaders relates to issues of poor governance, of individuals weakening state institutions, of law enforcement being used to settle political score. When leaders fail to hold each other accountable, party structures are too weak to enforce the law and resignations are lauded while the perpetrator walks free without consequences. This will almost always lead to a weakening of the capacity to govern and the inability of a government to carry out its activities. Corrupt ambitions The second lesson is that when a mechanism is needed to make sure that government provides institutions within which the rule of law, accountability and public authority is enforced, those with corrupt ambitions will gladly run the show – to the harm of society, especially its most vulnerable members. The third lesson is one that many politicians have a hard time understanding and ANC politicians seem more impervious to than most: effective governance is crucial to economic growth and progress in a young democracy. Especially one that is in need of investment to unlock an economy stuck in a low-growth zone with a significant unemployment rate. These weaknesses are a catalyst to enabling and facilitating corrupt behaviour. Two reports by Corruption Watch – ‘The Time is Now’ and ‘Analysis of Corruption Trends’ – illustrate how key government institutions are not only affected but in some cases destroyed, while others are used for political battles. The recent National Treasury forensic report on alleged corrupt practices at Transnet and Eskom, and the damning findings it has presented on corruption linked to these SOEs, drives home the point. Cliques loot, establish their own rules Where institutions meant to examine the activity and effectiveness of government are hollowed out or weakened, lawlessness takes hold. It anchors itself, and creates parallel informal institutions where cliques can loot, establish their own rules, and operate without any consequences. The SABC crisis is a good example; during Hlaudi Motsoeneng’s tenure the public broadcaster was run by a man who regarded himself as not bound by any rules except his. Given the links between politics and the activities of the state, it’s easy to understand how corrupt, damaged and unappealing perceptions have become synonymous with government – and how this in turn sees South Africa continuing to be trapped in the cycle of high inequality and low job creation. This has led to a more polarised society, with the poor being mostly affected. At this stage in our young democracy, it is important for government and its associated institutions to be seen to be effective and not weakened by corruption, ineffectualness and poor governance. Again this escapes our politicians, who refuse to admit how the dark political cloud has overshadowed the economy and stunted growth. Rather than recognise that the state cannot be the sole driver of economic or social development, our politicians choose to present us with vignettes of Latin American countries. This when they should be looking at countries that were able to lift their economies and people up by realising that the state must instead become a facilitator of private sector investment. It can do so through effective governance. Ambitious, corrupt, dangerous people, and an ailing ruling party that has failed to rein in its members, has led to where South Africa finds itself today. Broke, and failing.