It is unsettling that today between 547 million and one billion people around the world lack access to safe water. Of these people, over 150 million rely on untreated surface water. The United Nations (UN) Human Rights Council Resolution 27/7 of September 2014 entitles every human, without discrimination, to have access to sufficient, safe, acceptable, physically accessible and affordable water for personal and domestic use and to have physical and affordable access to sanitation, in all spheres of life, that is safe, hygienic, secure, socially and culturally acceptable and that provides privacy and ensures dignity. The primary responsibility for fulfilling this basic human right resides with a country’s government. Practically speaking, sufficient refers to a minimum of between 20 and 40 litres of water per person per day. Water is regarded safe if it meets certain standards and does not pose a significant risk to health over a lifetime of consumption, to babies, the immune compromised or the elderly. According to the World Health Organisation, a water source should be located within one kilometre of the user’s place of residence for it to be considered physically accessible. Although there is no consensus on what affordable means, the UN suggests that the cost of water should not exceed 3% of an individual’s personal income. Governments across the globe are faced with providing water infrastructure and services far beyond what their budgets can support. The South African government is no exception. Severe droughts, growing population and crumbling infrastructure are putting major strain on an already bankrupt Department of Water and Sanitation. Given the large and rising funding gap, which is estimated to be in excess of R700 billion, private sector involvement in the local water sector is vital. Participation can take the form of public-private-partnerships or impact investments. Impact investors invest in businesses and funds with the aim of creating social and/or environmental impact whilst also generating a financial return. Impact investors in the water sector could, for example, invest in businesses that develop water purification infrastructure such as a small scale desalination plants in rural areas. Alternatively they could fund social enterprises that provide water purification products or services. Scholars have, however, raised concerns about investors and companies profiting from the provision of a basic human right. Local critics’ unease with this development not only stems from the high levels of poverty in the country, but also from the ever widening income and inequality gaps. In light of limited academic research and the urgent need to address the status quo in South Africa, we set out to investigate the role that the impact investors could play in the local water sector. Specific attention was given to the apparent moral dilemma from an investment point of view. Semi-structured interviews were conducted with eight local impact investors, five role players in the impact investment market and seven experts in the water provision process. The participants were adamant that the primary responsibility for providing potable water in South Africa lies with government. They do, however, see an important role for private sector investors given government’s inability to meet the growing demand. The vast majority of participants said that there is nothing wrong with profiting from the provision of a basic human right. All of these participants, however, said that drinking water should be provided at a “reasonable” price. They felt strongly that financial returns should not be pursued at the expense of those who cannot afford it. Determining a “reasonable” price is, however, quite complex, especially as many South Africans expect water to be provided free of charge. This expectation is rooted, to a large extent, in government’s free allotment of six kilolitres of water per household per month. Private sector impact investors entering the local water sector should apply their minds when it comes to price determination. They need to acknowledge citizens’ ability to pay as well as their needs and expectations. Investors should test their assumptions in practice and might have to consider a tiered pricing system for different market segments. We recommend that government investigate the possibility of offsetting low financial return prospects in rural and peri-urban areas by charging premiums to entities that purchase a commitment to a one hundred per cent assurance of supply of water. Should peri-urban and rural populations gain better access to drinking water, government could prevent unnecessary death, disease, lost education hours, limited food production, stunted economic development and civil unrest. Steve McCallum and Suzette Viviers are academics in the Department of Business Management at Stellenbosch University.