We are rapidly reaching the end of the year, and with it comes the anniversary of Steinhoff’s share price collapse due to accounting irregularities. Billions were wiped off the Johannesburg Stock Exchange. This year has shown us the importance of good corporate governance, as a slew of once-popular stocks (and politicians) became fallen angels. In a series of articles carried by Moneyweb, asset manager Cratos Capital is taking a closer look at the missteps made by investors, asset managers included.  As the writer observed in the first article in the series: “As asset managers, we have to be better at spotting the loser before it takes the next leg down. “I have decided to detail the failures of each of the culprits in a series of short articles that will be carried over the coming days. The companies that have affected our performance this year include Steinhoff, Aspen, EOH, Resilient, Grindrod Shipping and General Electric.” Part 1 of the fallen angels series looks at the collapse of Steinhoff. Part 2 looks at the cases of Aspen and EOH. When listed companies have cross-holdings in other listed companies, the waters can get muddied. This is the case with the Resilient group of property companies, which has suffered a spectacular 60% share price collapse, from over R150 a share to R60 a share. Management at Resilient has been accused of share price manipulation in numerous analyst reports. Interestingly, CEO Des de Beer faced allegations of fraud at a previous iteration of the Resilient group called Pangbourne. The allegations show how De Beer and accomplices from within the group would buy up properties from Pangbourne for next to nothing (below market value) and sell them into the market for an absolute fortune. It is these old reports and articles from Noseweek that we should have paid more attention to, and quizzed management about, before investing in Nepi Rockcastle. All the companies in the Resilient group have faced a similar sell-off since the allegations surfaced, wiping out over R120 billion of value. The reports this year by fund managers 36One, Navigare Securities, Arqaam Capital, and Mergence Investment Managers, alleged that the premium valuations of Resilient group shares were not a result of normal market activity, but rather of share price manipulation by the company and affiliated parties. They allege that share price inflation was made possible by a convoluted group structure, in which four companies each own stakes in one another and trade inter-group shares frequently. Group company shares were also traded through its black economic empowerment (BEE) trusts, which were not consolidated into the group’s financials. The motive to inflate the Resilient share price was to keep it in the Top 40 Index, which meant index-tracking funds would be forced buyers of the stock. After an analysis of Resilient’s financials, Sygnia Asset Management CEO Magda Wierzycka described it as a Ponzi scheme. Resilient enlisted the help of former auditor-general Shauket Fakie to conduct an ‘independent’ investigation to clear their name. A similar tactic was employed during the Pangbourne years, with Werksmans attorneys producing a report which few have seen. Fakie found no evidence of market manipulation, insider trading or misconduct. This was inconsistent with 36One’s report as well as the reports of several other asset managers. Analysts say the scope of the investigation was narrow, and the powers of the investigator limited. Resilient even conceded the independent review could not access the full set of records of transactions in Resilient shares on the JSE to identify potential insider trading or share price manipulation. They also admitted that Fakie did not have the power to compel all parties who might possess relevant information to provide testimony or produce documents. Fakie did not even interview the report writers from 36One, citing time constraints as a reason. Apparently Fakie wanted the interview on a Monday and 36One could only grant an interview on Thursday. The share prices of the companies in the Resilient group have not recovered since the release of the Fakie report. Then in August the Public Investment Corporation, Old Mutual and Coronation Fund Managers, among others, wrote a letter to the boards of the four companies within the Resilient stable, calling for one of the big four accounting firms to probe allegations of share-price manipulation. This request was denied, with the CEO of Nepi Rockcastle stating that it was not feasible, and a forensic investigation was not desired by their broader shareholder base. Resilient and its associate companies are still under investigation by the Financial Services Conduct Authority (FSCA). De Beer has threatened to take legal action (against the FSCA we’re assuming, or possibly the JSE) if the investigations go on for too long. Despite cleverly investing in central and eastern Europe some 11 years ago before their peers, De Beer and Resilient have lost the trust of investors. If this was a once-off accounting error and not a major conspiracy of share-price manipulation, or if past allegations of fraud did not exist against De Beer, we may be inclined to have a different opinion. We await the outcome of the FSCA investigation and hope the worst is over for shareholders in these companies. There is no timeline for the release of the report. In the meantime, we have begun moving capital into MAS Real Estate. This is a property company that provides exposure to Eastern Europe, headed by great capital allocators who do not have a cloud of poor corporate governance over their heads. Grindrod Shipping is a dry-bulk carrier and liquid-bulk shipping company that was spun out of Grindrod Limited in June. The shipping business’ origins date back to 1910 when it was formed by Captain John Edward Grindrod. Grindrod Shipping is based in Singapore and owns and operates 34 bulk carriers and 15 product tankers. It is focused on smaller Handysize and Supramax bulk carriers, and smaller product tankers. The fleet is young, with an average age of six years, Japanese-built, and fuel-efficient. The share was listed on the Nasdaq, with a secondary listing on the JSE. The share traded at R195 at listing but then tanked. It currently trades at around R100 a share – a dive of more than 45%. The rationale for being listed on the Nasdaq means the company is now on the radar of global shipping investors, who will be able to better benchmark it against the 19 other shipping stocks also listed on the exchange. It seems that as analysts, we (and the underwriters) mis-priced these assets relative to the market’s expectations. The listing price valuation was based on independently-verified estimates of the net asset value of the company’s vessels. Management did a poor job of marketing the listing of this new entity. This was tricky given they were in a closed period. They were also unfortunate in that many large South African institutions became forced sellers as Grindrod Limited, the parent company, was their main focus for funds and portfolios. After a global supply glut and lack of demand after the financial crisis in 2008, the global shipping market struggled. Added to that are stern new rules by the International Maritime Organisation that will place a strict cap on the sulphur content in marine fuel to cut carbon emissions. The current slow pace of shipbuilding means the global fleet is growing at just 2% a year. Demand in terms of freight tonne kilometres, a standard measurement for the industry, is between 3% and 4% a year. This bodes well for Grindrod shipping for the medium term, as it takes two to three years for a ship to be built and come online. Unfortunately, this does little to placate upset traders, shareholders, and clients of the loss of value which has occurred in the short term. General Electric (GE) is an iconic American corporation. The brand conjures up images from the 1950s. A wife in an ankle-length dress with a pearl necklace and hair coiffed, and a husband just home from work. He’s dressed in a suit and tie, briefcase in one hand and fedora in the other. He kisses his wife hello in the kitchen, GE devices adorn the countertops; she greets the breadwinner with a beer from the combination refrigerator/freezer – General Electric neatly emblazoned in silver on the front. Mother calls little Timmy and Sally-Anne in from the yard. They were playing ball with their dog Spot. She asks them to wash their hands for dinner, and say hello to their father, as she opens the GE double-oven electric stove to check on the roast. General Electric was as iconic as apple pie and baseball. It was a leading innovator and had products in every home. In August 2000 the company reached an all-time high, valued at over $600 billion. Shares under then CEO Jack Welch’s 40-year tenure surged 4 000%. Fast forward 18 years, and it’s worth just under $100 billion today – that’s a drop of 81% or half a trillion dollars. That’s the GDP of Belgium, or the market value of Facebook, or a new top-of-the-range iPhone for everyone in the United States. Blame has been placed on Jeff Immelt (CEO from 2001 until 2017) and on the GE board for keeping him on for so long. Immelt made ill-timed and terrible acquisitions. He entered the subprime mortgage business in 2004, four years before the US credit bubble burst. In 2015 he bought the power generation division of French multinational Alstom, pushing GE’s into coal-fired turbines as utilities were switching to natural gas and renewables. He also tangled the company in France’s difficult regulatory regime. The shares fell 45% in 2017 after cash flow shortages and weak sales in its power unit, among other factors. They’ve crashed another 35% so far this year. The decline meant it was ejected from the Dow Jones Industrial Average in June, necessitating more selling. It’s had to embark on asset sales and spin-offs and has cut the dividend. In January GE found $11 billion in charges stemming from its insurance business and changes to the US tax code. CEO John Flannery stated that he might have to completely break up GE in order to save it. Flannery was fired last month, along with the announcement of a massive asset write-down of the troubled power unit. This has been our worst performing share in portfolios to date. What this has taught us is that technology changes. We need to be wary of old technology becoming defunct and avoid getting caught up in the hype of the new technologies of today. Like Steinhoff and GE, beware of lots of acquisitions in quick succession. Some stocks provide a sense of nostalgia, a glitzy century-old brand and a time that was. The past always seems more glamorous, even the stock market does (hindsight bias?). The shiny letters of General Electric and the legend of Jack Welch (and his four decades of success) may have blinded us to the quick deterioration of a once-great company. Warren Buffet has since taken a stake in GE. We hope the new CEO, Larry Culp Jr – the first outsider to run GE in its 126-year history –  can turn things around, and we are eager to hear his strategy for doing so. Lee Kern is an assistant portfolio manager at Cratos Capital.