A key Brexit summit that was in danger of being derailed by a spat between Spain and the UK over Gibraltar is confirmed to go ahead. European Council President Donald Tusk formally invited leaders to the summit after brokering an agreement between Spain and Britain over how the disputed territory should be treated after Brexit. Leaders are due to sign off on the Brexit deal at the meeting — a crucial milestone after more than a year of talks. Spanish Prime Minister Pedro Sanchez had threatened to boycott the gathering unless he got guarantees over Gibraltar. While no single country has a veto, a boycott would have embarrassing and awkward, and it wasn’t certain the meeting would have gone ahead. Britain published a legal text, as Spain had demanded. But it’s not clear who won the stand-off. The UK insisted that its view of how Gibraltar should be treated in the future UK-EU trade negotiations hadn’t changed. “I will recommend that on Sunday we approve the outcome of the Brexit negotiations,” Tusk said in his letter to the bloc’s leaders. “We intend to work resolutely towards building the best possible relationship with the UK after Brexit, as friends and partners.” Sanchez is due to speak in Madrid at 3 p.m.Sanchez wanted to see a satisfactory, written declaration from the UK that the 2.6 square-mile territory of Gibraltar — ceded to Britain in 1713 — won’t automatically be covered by any future UK-EU trade agreement. The spat erupted 17 months after the UK started negotiations with the EU over its withdrawal from the bloc. An agreement in principle was reached earlier this month and leaders have insisted there can be no issues left unresolved going into the summit. The sign-off will pave the way for May to try to get support for the deal from the UK Parliament, which might prove the trickiest step yet. Before Brexit negotiations started, the UK agreed with the EU that any future trade agreement won’t cover Gibraltar without the express consent of Spain. The Spanish government said wording in the deal agreed this month doesn’t make that clear. Spain lays claim to Gibraltar, a rocky outcrop off its southern coast, and questions the treaty that ceded it to Britain. The issue is also playing into regional elections in Andalusia, the Spanish region that neighbors Gibraltar, and that is a traditional stronghold for Sanchez’s Socialist party. May is scheduled to meet European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker in Brussels on Saturday at 6 p.m. The summit is due to start at 9.30 a.m. the following day. © 2018 Bloomberg L.P