July this year saw extensive media coverage of a Constitutional Court ruling that would see some temporary workers placed in companies by labour brokers being deemed to be permanent employees of those companies should the placement have exceeded three months. However, Werksmans director Jacques van Wyk says crucial aspects of the judgment and its practical impact on employers require more attention. He says media reports focused primarily on the three-month limit to temporary placements. It is however important to note that this only applies to workers who earn less than R205 433.30 per year. Further, it is important that the client of the labour broker only becomes the deemed employer for the purposes of the Labour Relations Act (and not, for example, the Income Tax Act or the Unemployment Insurance Act). This means that companies can still use the services of a labour broker – referred to as a temporary employment service (TES) – for extended periods if the worker earns more than R205 440 per annum, or is placed for periods shorter than three months. Another exception is when a TES provides a worker as a replacement for an employee who is absent from work temporarily, even if it is for longer periods and irrespective of earnings level, as in the case of pregnancy, for example, says Van Wyk. The type of work which is regarded as “temporary” can also be amended  by a Bargaining Council agreement for a specific category of workers, or through a sectoral determination or a ministerial determination by the minister of labour, he adds. He says it is important that the Constitutional Court clarified what the legal position has been since January 2015; in other words, that affected workers are deemed to be permanent employees if, at any time since January 2015, their placement exceeded a period of three months and they earned less than R R205 433.30 per annum. That could have serious implications for employers, Van Wyk says. He advises companies to immediately do an audit to assess which of their workers might have become deemed employees and to what extent they have not been remunerated like permanent employees during this period. They should also revisit their service level agreement with the TES. Secondly, companies should establish how many workers are still considered to be employed by the TES and determine how to deal with the contractual agreement with the TES. Van Wyk says the employer’s contractual relationship with the TES does not terminate automatically even if all the workers it placed are now deemed to be employees of the client. The TES typically manages the payroll for the affected employees, and the company must decide whether it is worthwhile to retain the services of the TES for that purpose. He says if the company has an HR department that performs those functions for other employees, it might mean unnecessary and costly duplication. It could further pose a risk if the TES fails to comply with statutory provisions and obligations that now attach to the employer. He says cancelling a service level agreement (SLA) with a TES could invoke penalty clauses in the agreement, even if the cancellation is the result of the changed situation around deemed employees. Some TES agreements provide for a placement fee of 20% of annual remuneration should its client employ the temporary worker it placed. Van Wyk believes it could be difficult to enforce such a provision in the case of TES employees who become the deemed employees of the client, but says some TESs do pursue placement fees and that companies should assess their risks in this regard. He says there might be some nasty surprises when an agreement with a TES is cancelled, such as failure to pay over workers’ contributions to the Unemployment Benefit Fund (UIF). Employers should therefore check the indemnities and warranties in the contract. Companies should also plan for an orderly transfer of workers from the employ of the TES. Van Wyk points out that workers are not transferred with their leave and other entitlements as when a business is sold as a going concern. They start afresh. The TES must finalise such entitlements and will bill the client accordingly, which means its final claim could be substantially higher than budgeted for by the company. The company will also have to decide whether it will recognise the years of service of deemed employees with the TES as this could become relevant with regard to retrenchments and internal promotions, for example. Van Wyk says if the company decides to retain the services of the TES, it should consider renegotiating the Service Level Agreement in line with the new reality. He says the company should appreciate that the deemed workers are now a new group of employees that should be integrated into its existing workforce as soon as possible. This does not only apply to HR processes, but also company culture. This must be addressed as soon as possible or employers might find themselves facing litigation, says Van Wyk. Brought to you by Werksmans Attorneys.