Volatility in the equity markets invariably diverts the attention of investors to the relatively calmer oases of fixed income investments and the safe havens of the US dollar and Japanese yen. Investors in multi-asset funds enjoy the luxury of the fund managers making the calls between equities and fixed income on their behalf. Others need to do the research and make the decisions themselves, hopefully timeously. What if you want to avoid making these calls during market cycles and just have an allocation to fixed income anyway from day one? What fixed income security is less volatile through the economic cycles? Fixed income as a category comprises many types of instruments: government treasury bills, government bonds, corporate bonds, securitised mortgage and consumer loans, and municipal bonds. Cash has fixed income characteristics if invested in bank saving accounts but it is considered as a separate and ‘least risky’ asset class because, nominally, in and of itself it does not change in value. Fixed income securities change in value as a result primarily of interest rate movements, inflation dynamics and change in risk ratings of the issuers of the bonds. Avoiding losses from fixed income securities invariably implies getting the interest rate forecast, inflation expectation and credit rating correct. Very few private investors or money managers get these forecasts right. Inflation-protected bonds, floating rate instruments and corporate bonds have less forecast risk since their pricing is not driven as much by interest rate movements. As such, these fixed income instruments can be selected without worrying too much about the macroeconomic cycles. Inflation-protected securities can be problematic in periods of deflation but otherwise they are less sensitive to interest rate cycles compared to long-term fixed-rate bonds.  The graph above shows a comparison of inflation-adjusted portfolio valuations between cash, mortgage-backed securities, corporate bonds and treasury bonds in the US market. Floating rate instruments like mortgage-backed securities and corporate bonds exhibit less volatility to changing interest rate expectations. Changing credit quality expectations drive valuations of mortgage-backed securities and corporate bonds. Cash locks in an after-inflation and tax loss generally. Corporate bonds are comprised of investment grade bonds or high yield (higher risk) bonds or bank loans. Investment grade and high yield bonds are issued directly by corporate issuers into the bond market. Ratings agencies would have allocated a risk rating to these bonds and investors subscribe for these issues and deal directly with the corporate appointed market making agents. Active benefits Bank loans are a particularly interesting fixed income instrument. Bank loans instruments are comprised of underlying loans that are granted by the corporate banking divisions of banks to corporates. These loans are then packaged and sold to fixed income mutual fund managers. They are generally not available to retail investors directly. There are some exchange-traded funds (ETFs) that are available that invest in bank loan instruments. However, in the following paragraph I will discuss why I believe it is better to buy an actively managed bank loan fund rather than a passive one. The advantage of buying an actively managed bank loan fund is that the end investor is enjoying the benefit of three credit assessments. In the first instance, the bank’s own credit department has assessed the corporate borrower and underlying transaction and granted the loan. Typically, banks grant 40-50% of all loans applied for, depending on the credit cycle. Stringent covenant conditions are usually set for corporate borrowers to comply with, and the loans enjoy seniority in the balance sheet. Credit ratings agencies themselves also assess the corporates and assign credit ratings. The actively managed bank loan mutual fund itself also has well resourced internal credit departments that assess both the corporate borrower and the bank’s own credit process. Like any other asset class, losses are possible in bank loans –especially if the underlying borrowers become over-geared. Banks have access to management accounts of these borrowers sooner than most of the market participants. Moreover, the banks have a first-hand ringside view of the underlying transaction flows in the corporate borrower and thus have a good grasp of the underlying business performance. Therefore, I believe the actively managed bank loan funds have an information advantage which assists in managing and recovering from losses. Source: Galileo Asset Managers The table above compares the Invesco senior bank loan ETF, JP Morgan bank loan floating rate actively managed fund and Pimco investment grade bond ETF. The JP Morgan actively managed bank loan fund enjoys superior risk performance with the lowest volatility, highest Sharpe ratio and positive performance periods. As the underlying loans are floating rate in nature, volatility due to interest rate movements is minimised. Investors should seriously consider including bank loan funds as part of their portfolios. Pragnesh Desai is CEO of Galileo Asset Managers.