At the close of trading last year, the Naspers share price was R3 459. This week it has traded around R2 750. That is drop of more than 20% over the course of 2018. Even with this decline, however, the counter is still by far the biggest component of the local market. At the end of September Naspers was 21.72% of the FTSE/JSE Top 40, 18.23% of the FTSE/JSE All Share Index (Alsi) and 22.72% of the FTSE/JSE Shareholder Weighted All Share Index (SWIX). This has caused a conundrum for local fund managers for some time. When one stock constitutes a fifth of the market, how do you manage it in your portfolio? Single-stock risk Dale Hutcheson, co-manager of the Absa Prime Equity Fund, explains the dilemma: “The Absa Prime Equity Fund holds half the benchmark weight in Naspers and it’s still a sizeable weight at over 10%,” he says. “Holding positions of more than 10% in a stock is a challenge, because that is a very high single-stock exposure.” No matter your conviction in the future of Naspers, having that much of your portfolio in one company means that if something unexpected did happen, it would have a material impact on the fund as a whole. If a fund doesn’t hold Naspers, however, it runs the risk of deviating materially from the performance of the benchmark. Some active managers don’t mind doing that, but many others do. They are conscious of maintaining performance broadly in line with the index, which is often easier for investors to accept. Industrial funds This is an even bigger issue for industrial sector funds. Naspers is almost 38% of the FTSE/JSE Industrial 25 Index, which most industrial funds use as their benchmark. The company has become so dominant in this sector that Satrix could no longer track this index for the Satrix Indi ETF. In March this year it changed its benchmark to the FTSE/JSE Capped Industrial 25 Index because index tracker funds may not hold more than 35% in a single stock. “The Satrix Indi ETF started breaching this limit due to the Naspers weight, so we had to ballot investors to change the index,” explains Jenny Albrecht, the chief operations officer for investments at Satrix. “The capped version of the index caps each security at 30%.” Even so, the Satrix Indi is among the 15 funds with the highest exposure to Naspers. As the table below shows, this is a list dominated by industrial sector funds and index trackers. Source: Morningstar Apart from the last fund on this list, they all have at least a quarter of their portfolios in this one stock. The SIM Industrial Fund has nearly half of all its money invested in Naspers. Risk and reward In one sense, investors in these industrial sector funds can feel quite good about this exposure. After all, 10 years ago Naspers was trading around R150 per share. As a result, if you look at 10-year performance numbers, industrial funds feature high up on the list. A great deal of their positive performance has been on the back of Naspers’s sensational rise. However, as Naspers has come down over the last year, these funds have come down with them. Industrial sector funds are among the worst-performing local unit trusts over the last 12 months. Brian Pyle, the co-manager of the Old Mutual Industrial Fund, acknowledges that he spends a lot of time grappling with the dominance of this single stock. At the end of September, the fund had a weighting of 28.6% in Naspers, which is both lower than the industrial index and the average of other funds in this category. “I’m a little bit worried about the risk posed by Naspers, so I’m happy to be somewhat underweight,” Pyle explains. “But because we are measured relative to both our peers and the index, it’s difficult to be too far underweight when we view the company quite favourably. It’s a bit of a dilemma.” SIM Industrial Fund The most generous position in the stock is however that held by the SIM Industrial Fund. For many fund managers, there would be too much risk in holding almost half a portfolio in a single company, but SIM’s Andrew Kingston is more sanguine. “We are of the view there is significant upside to the current share price as a confluence of factors have weighed on the share,” he argues. “This possibly represents a once in a lifetime opportunity to own a share with exceptional upside.” Hence, the fund’s overweight position. Ordinarily a sector fund could not hold more than 35% in a single counter, but the growth in the Naspers share price has allowed this to happen. “The outperformance of Naspers over a long period of time has accentuated the weighting of the share in the portfolio,” Kingston explains. “There are no requirements to sell down back to 35%. “The fund’s aim is to outperform the index and the peer portfolios,” he adds. “In order to do that we have an overweight position in Naspers. This gives us a slight competitive advantage if Naspers does well, which is what we would expect over time.” But what about the risk? “We manage risk by doing very detailed fundamental analysis, looking very broadly at the industry, and making sure there is a large enough safety net before investing under a range of different scenarios,” Kingston says. “Our analyst has visited Tencent management on more than 10 occasions, and has visited many other competitors in the space over more than 10 years. The quality of our detailed research plus our investment style as a pragmatic value equity house allows us to back our high conviction ideas.”