There is an apparent disconnect between the annual reports compiled by government-owned companies, trusts and funds, and reality. There is also a misguided belief that a glossy report full of pretty pictures and overflowing with optimistic objectives will obscure non-performance, irrelevance and irregular expenditure. The Brand South Africa Trust (Brand SA) was established in 2002 in terms of the Trust Property Control Act No.57 of 1988, as amended, and is listed as a Schedule 3A Public Entity in terms of the Public Finance Management Act No.1 of 1999 (PFMA). Lofty ideals Falling under the purview of the Department of Communications (DoC), Brand SA has lofty ideals. It ‘supports’ the national priorities and outcomes detailed in the National Development Plan 2030 and the Medium Term Strategic Framework (MTFS). It also ‘supports’ SA’s national objectives of inclusive economic growth, job creation, poverty alleviation and social cohesion. And Brand SA encourages local and foreign investment, tourism, and trade through the promotion of Brand SA. Tritely, “It manages South Africa’s Nation Brand reputation in order to improve the county’s global attractiveness and competitiveness”. The then minister of communications Nomvula Mokonyane, in the foreword for the financial year ended March 2018, stated that Brand SA “continuously worked towards implementing proactive and coordinated marketing, communication, and reputation management strategies, to position the Nation Brand positively”. Brand SA aims to make “an indirect contribution to economic growth, job creation, poverty alleviation, and social cohesion by encouraging local and foreign investment, tourism, and trade through the promotion of Brand SA”. How does Brand SA benchmark SA? They do produce their own research reports. For example, Brand SA has compiled a Good Country Index, and has ranked SA 2nd in International peace and security, 25th in Science and technology, 25th in world order, and 47th overall. Brand SA also compiled a Nation Brand Index 2017, and ranked SA 38th out of 50. Brand SA refers to the Ibrahim Index of African Governance, which places South Africa 6th out of 54 nations in terms of overall infrastructure profile and capability, and the 2016/17 World Bank Logistics Performance Index, which ranks South Africa 20th of 160 nations in terms of logistics capability. Brand SA is of the opinion that SA is “far more open and transparent in its public institutions than some of the most so-called ‘advanced’ nations on the planet” and has thus ranked SA 3rd in its own Open Budget Index 2017. Auditor-general report Brand SA was so busy polishing SA’s image that it neglected to look after its own. The auditor-general (AG) noted some deficiencies in the system of internal control. Effective and appropriate steps were not taken to prevent irregular expenditure amounting to R10.5 million, per note 37 to the annual financial statements, as required by section 51(1)(b)(ii) of the PFMA. It also appears that the AG was not given the directors’ or the audit committee’s reports prior to issuing the AG report. The AG has the following to say on financial management: “The entity’s established processes were not adequate to ensure that the performance information reports are accurate and complete. The annual performance reports submitted for audit contained numerous misstatements. These misstatements were as a result [of a] lack of supervision and review of the annual performance reports.” The nitty gritty – the cost Brand SA spends some R200 million a year building SA’s brand. Total revenue for 2018 is R202 million (2017: R188 million). The source of the revenue in 2018 arose from other income (0.21%), partnership income (2.74), finance income (0.81%), and government grants and subsidies (96.28%). Brand SA has no problem spending this money. Expenditure that stands out is shown below: 2018 2017 Employee-related costs (number of employees not specified) 59.8 58 Research fees 7.3 4.7 Media buy 45.7 22.5 Agency fees 16.1 13.5 Activation costs 43.4 32.6 Travel and subsistence, overseas 5.3 4.9 Travel and subsistence, local 3.2 4.4 180.8 140.6 Brand SA should be capable of doing its own research. If it does not have the skills, it can download and study all the various reports issued by external organisations. Even better, it can simply read the in-depth reports written by SA’s financial journalists. This would have saved it from spending R7.3 million (2017: R4.7 million) on research. Activation costs of R43.4 million (2017: R32.6 million) are to presumably enhance brand awareness and include global and domestic ‘market activations’. SA has not managed to stay out of world headlines, for all the wrong reasons. Chairperson Khanyisile Kweyama is of the view that the year ended March 2018 “was one of the most eventful and dynamic in the history of the political landscape of South Africa”. Back to reality, what of the R50 billion revenue shortfall, dirty politics, and floundering state-owned enterprises requiring massive government bailouts? And did I mention unimpressive tourism statistics? Brand SA has not provided any proof related to how it has positively encouraged tourism (apart from self-produced reports), nor how it has facilitated trade and investment, or made a dent in unemployment. If it disappeared tomorrow, nobody would notice.