South Africa’s largest private healthcare provider, Netcare, has embarked on an ambitious digitisation programme set for completion in 2022 at a total cost of R600 million. Speaking at a results presentation yesterday, Dr Richard Friedland, CEO of the group, said the digitisation programme is expected to: The system will be piloted at Netcare Milpark Hospital from March 2019 and the rollout to the rest of the Netcare hospitals is scheduled to begin in 2020 with completion by 2022. Netcare has already successfully completed the digitisation of Netcare 911. Friedland says the group has seen “extraordinary” benefits to date. “This new system will essentially create an electronic trail of procedures, diagnosis and treatments for patients. There is currently a severe shortage of nursing staff in both the public and private healthcare sectors in South Africa. ‘Too often, we see older, experienced nurses not spending enough time on the practical aspects of patient care because they are tied up in administrative work. “The digitisation programme will alleviate their admin workload, so they are able to focus on the patients more,” he says. Apple chosen as partner to reduce hacking threat Netcare is partnering with Apple, and nurses will be able to access the patient’s electronic medical records via iPads. “There will be no breach of confidentiality as ownership of the information rests with the patient and they will have to sign permission for their data to be recorded electronically before being admitted to a hospital,” Friedland says. He notes that Netcare specifically chose Apple as its partner as it is a closed ecosystem with a reduced chance of being hacked. “The data will sit in a server with a mirror effect in terms of accessibility. No patient information will be downloaded to individual iPads,” he explains. Neil Brown, fund manager and equity analyst at Electus Fund Managers, says that private hospitals in South Africa are being squeezed by government, regulations and the larger medical schemes such as Discovery. “In order to just maintain their operating profit and margins at current levels, companies such as Netcare have to become smarter by adopting efficient measures such as the digitisation programme. It is too early to say whether or not there will be related job losses,” he says. Netcare employs 22 000 people in South Africa alone. For the year to September 2018, the group’s revenue climbed 8.4% to R20.71 billion while the operating margin crept down by 0.5% to 20.3% with a normalised operating profit of R3.48 billion. Adjusted headline earnings per share (heps) from continuing operations grew by 0.6% to 171.6 cents from 170.6 cents a year before. South Africa to remain core business After a strategic decision to exit operations in the UK at the end of March this year, Netcare will be concentrating on its South African operations and has no plans to make further forays abroad at this point. Friedland confirmed that Netcare’s core business remained in South Africa and this was not likely to change. Earlier this year, Netcare secured the approval of the Competition Tribunal for the R1.3 billion acquisition of Akeso, a national network of 12 dedicated mental healthcare facilities, currently comprising 834 beds. Brown says the private hospital group probably made a few mistakes when it first entered the UK private hospital sector in 2006. “Firstly, by overpaying for an investment and secondly, by structuring separate entities to own property and operations respectively. This complicated the investment and ultimately led to a situation where the ‘operating’ company was paying too high a rental. In South Africa, the private hospital group prefers to own the hospitals it operates in,” he observes. Netcare shareholders will receive a final dividend of 60 cents per share, up 5.3% over the previous period’s payment, and an additional special dividend payment of 40 cents per share.