South Africa’s ruling African National Congress has decided that Job Mokgoro should take over as premier of the North West province from Supra Mahumapelo, who stepped down in May, according to two people with knowledge of the matter. Mokgoro, a former director-general of the North West and ex-principal of South Africa’s National School of Government, is due to be sworn in by the provincial legislature on Friday. The ANC’s national working committee agreed to appoint him as premier at a meeting on Wednesday, said the people, who asked not to be identified because they aren’t authorised to speak on the matter. The ANC is scheduled to brief the media about the committee’s decisions on Thursday. Mahumapelo quit after violent protests erupted against his leadership in the region. While his exit from his government post has helped President Cyril Ramaphosa assert his authority over the province, he remains chairman of the ANC in the North West. Mahumapelo opposed Ramaphosa’s bid to win election as party leader in December and is a close ally of Jacob Zuma, who was forced to resign as president in February. “Mokgoro’s appointment will strengthen Ramaphosa’s position in the ANC,” said Theo Venter, a political analyst at North-West University in Potchefstroom, west of Johannesburg. “He will have to break the political stronghold of Mahumapelo.” Disgruntlement with the Mahumapelo’s leadership mounted over his handling of the graft allegations and the sidelining of his ANC rivals in the North West. A police investigative unit known as the Hawks said it raided his offices in March in connection with alleged maladministration, fraud and corruption amounting to about R160 million ($11.7 million). He denies any wrongdoing. Venter, who’s known Mokgoro for 30 years, said “he is in my view what the North West needs now — a man that can coordinate and can bridge the gap to the next election in 2019.” Pule Mabe, the ANC’s spokesman, didn’t answer calls to his mobile phone. © 2018 Bloomberg