Old Mutual Limited’s (OML) Johannesburg Stock Exchange (JSE) debut got off to a muted start with shares in the newly-formed company yo-yoing shortly after trade commenced. OML is a product of the break-up of the 173-year-old Anglo-South African insurance group, Old Mutual PLC, which was mooted as a mechanism to unlock the conglomerate discount from which PLC suffered and to create value for shareholders. The break-up, first announced in 2016, comes to fruition this week with the listing of Quilter – formerly Old Mutual Wealth – in London and Johannesburg on Monday. Today, marks the “homecoming” of OML as the insurance business born out of South Africa, lists as a stand-alone Africa-focused entity across several African bourses. OML, which holds the former Old Mutual Emerging Markets assets, PLC’s residual interests and its 54% stake in Nedbank, now has a primary listing on the JSE, a standard listing on the London Stock Exchange and secondary listings in Malawi, Namibia and Zimbabwe. Street parade happening on the streets of Sandton #WithAfricaForAfrica pic.twitter.com/ySqhbinRb9 — Old Mutual Limited (@OldMutualLtd) June 26, 2018  “As one of Africa’s largest financial services companies, our homecoming is a very exciting prospect. It’s a move that signals our commitment to create value for all our stakeholders on the continent. Furthermore, it underscores our confidence in Africa’s remarkable resilience and ability to attract investors,” OML chief executive Peter Moyo said prior to the listing. Given the company’s focus on the continent, OML’s investor base is expected to undergo a significant change in the weeks to come. Upon PLC’s break-up, shareholders in the parent company received one share in Quilter and roughly three shares in Old Mutual Limited for every three PLC shares held. Now foreign investors, who held shares in PLC and do not have a mandate to invest in emerging market stocks are expected to sell their newly acquired OML shares – it is widely expected that this stock will be picked up my emerging market fund managers and index participants. The next step in the break-up will come when OML unbundles its controlling stake in Nedbank down to a 19.9% stake. This, according to executives at OML and Nedbank, will only occur one OML’s shareholder register settles.