Steinhoff International Holding NV agreed to sell its Austrian furniture retailer Rudolf Leiner GmbH and real estate assets in the country to Rene Benko’s Signa Holding GmbH to prevent a looming insolvency of the unit. Signa’s offer for the business and the properties was accepted by Steinhoff, Rudolf Leiner chief executive office Gunnar George said in an emailed statement on Thursday. “In the coming days, all contracts will be agreed and fixed.” No details on pricing or terms were provided by Rudolf Leiner, also known under its brand names Kika/Leiner. A Signa spokesman declined to comment. Since reporting financial irregularities late last year, Steinhoff has kept retail businesses around the world in operation even as its share price plunged more than 95 percent and liquidity dried up. While most creditors this month agreed to a standstill agreement on the bulk of 9.6 billion euros ($11.3 billion) of debt, Kika/Leiner’s situation worsened when credit insurers refused to guarantee payments to suppliers. Kika/Leiner has 70 stores in Austria and other parts of Europe compared with Steinhoff’s total of 1 200. In a presentation to lenders last month, Steinhoff said it intended to turn around the Austrian retailer, focusing on curbing spending and reducing headcount. Proven ability Signa took over struggling German department-store chain Karstadt and its properties in several steps starting in 2012 and has restructured the business. This proves its ability to “secure long-term employment,” Kika/Leiner CEO George said in the statement. Steinhoff is battling to stay afloat while auditors at PwC investigate its finances with a view to publishing audited accounts by the end of the year. The crisis erupted in early December, when Deloitte LLP refused to sign off on results for 2017 and CEO Markus Jooste quit. Steinhoff’s retail chains include Conforama in France, Mattress Firm in the US, and Poundland in the UK. Kika/Leiner is leasing 94 properties from Hemisphere International Properties BV, Steinhoff’s European real-estate portfolio. Steinhoff said in April Hemisphere had been revalued at about 1.1 billion euros, half the previous book amount. Earlier on Thursday, Austrian newspaper Die Presse reported that Benko was ready to pay about 450 million euros for the properties, and 1 euro for the retail business. Steinhoff “remains in constructive discussions with its creditors to agree and implement a restructuring plan,” the company said in a statement. © 2018 Bloomberg L.P