They hit the road at midnight in celebratory packs, whooping and ululating for joy. Teenagers gathered on Riyadh’s main boulevard to gawk. Men cracked jokes about how lucky they were to no longer have to chauffeur their wives around. Saudi Arabia’s infamous ban on women driving came to an end with a mixture of excitement and trepidation early Sunday, as groups of women maneuvered their way through the still-packed streets of the capital. “You finally feel — I want to say, ‘equal,’” said Norah Albaiz, 21, after she drove to Starbucks behind the wheel of her father’s Toyota Land Cruiser. “We’re getting there. Nothing can stop me now.” Few issues have been as polarizing in the conservative Islamic kingdom as the prohibition on female drivers, which Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman promised to end as part of his plan to open up the kingdom’s oil-dependent economy and loosen social restrictions — though he’s cracking down politically. Rights activists While the government has been keen to promote the end of the ban as a sign that women’s rights are advancing, several of the country’s most prominent women’s rights activists — including some who fought for years to drive — were arrested last month on national security grounds. Women also still require the approval of male guardians to travel or marry — but not to obtain a driver’s license. The public mood was largely jubilant on Sunday, as women women reveled in a simple freedom they’d long been denied. in a simple freedom they’d long been denied. They blasted music from open windows and cheered each other on as they cruised the streets with a mixture of nervousness and glee. Police officers handed out flowers to female drivers. Prince Alwaleed bin Talal, the billionaire investor, shared a video of his daughter driving legally for the first time. From the back seat of Albaiz’s Land Cruiser, Lena Altammimi said her “heart was bursting.” “Many people claimed society wasn’t ready for it because people have a certain perception of the country that just wouldn’t budge,” said the 21-year-old Altammimi. “Seeing that very same society celebrate female driving yesterday and today is just a true indication that Saudi has been ready for a while and has transformed slowly but surely.” As Albaiz pulled into the Starbucks parking lot, a foreign street cleaner stopped his work to grin and wave. “Congratulations on driving!” another man shouted at them from a nearby car. “Good for you!” ‘Waiting forever’ At least in the early stages, the new right will for the most part benefit more privileged women, many of whom already had foreign licenses from studying or working abroad. It will take time for the change to trickle into more conservative households, where some warned that this violation of custom could lead society down the path to sin. Some women say they never want to drive, while others say they’ll wait, worried they could face harassment. “There were older women telling me not to drive this week, saying wait,” said Albaiz, whose parents taught her how to drive in secluded parts of the country when she was a teenager. “If we all just wait, we’re going to be waiting forever.” She already plans to buy her own car, she said. She has her heart set on a vanity plate reading, in Arabic, “Get out of the way.” © 2018 Bloomberg L.P