Set your sights elsewhere, women. Qatar Airways Chief Executive Officer Akbar Al Baker says only a man could rise to the challenges of his job. Moments after becoming chairman of the International Air Transport Association’s board of governors, one of the world’s biggest boys’ clubs, Al Baker did little to suggest things will change. At a press conference in Sydney, where IATA held its annual meeting, he was asked what could be done about the woeful representation of women in Middle East aviation. That’s not the case at Qatar Airways, Al Baker told the reporter. “Of course it has to be led by a man, because it is a very challenging position.” There were loud groans of disapproval from many reporters in the room. The comments contrast with efforts by some rivals to push up female representation at the upper echelons. Qantas Airways’ senior management is 40% female, including the heads of the international and frequent-flier loyalty businesses, CEO Alan Joyce said. SkyTeam appointed Delta executive Kristin Colvile as chief executive of the airline alliance earlier this month. Not only is diversity a competitive advantage, Joyce said, “It’s the right business thing to do and it’s the right moral thing to do.” A day earlier, IATA members from airlines across the world had listened to a panel discussing ways to address gender imbalances in the industry. When the IATA board posed for a group photo last week, there was just one woman among 26 airline chiefs — Christine Ourmières-Widener, CEO of UK regional carrier Flybe. Al Baker clarified his position in an interview with Bloomberg Television’s Haidi Lun after his press conference. “I was only referring to one individual,” he said. “I was not referring to the staff in general.” The company followed up with a statement later, reaffirming its commitment to gender equality. “While I am known in the media for some lightheartedness at press conferences, it is crucial that I emphasise the facts as I did today and the importance of women representatives in the airline industry,” the statement read. Qatar Airways staff is more than 44% female, the company said. The carrier has female pilots and female senior vice presidents, he said. There’s no gender inequality at Qatar Airways, Al Baker said in the interview. Asked whether he’d welcome a female executive as CEO, Al Baker said: “It will be my pleasure to have a female CEO candidate I could then develop to become CEO after me.”