Here’s what caught our attention on Tuesday: 1. Denel CFO placed on suspension Odwa Mhlwana, CFO at state-owned arms dealer Denel, was placed on suspension on Monday for alleged misconduct. The Denel board said Mhlwana has been placed on “special leave” until he faces a disciplinary investigation. The board added that the allegations of misconduct against Mhlwana and some other senior employees was brought to their attention by whistle-blowers, Reuters reported. 2. Liberty hacking saga Financial services group Liberty has been in the spotlight after falling victim to a cyber attack, in which some client information was compromised. CEO David Munro said Liberty did not give into the demands for a ransom by the group of hackers, and is deeming it a criminal act. An investigation is pending. Reuters is reporting that the South African Information Regulator is also due to question Liberty, as it seeks to obtain more information over the cyber attack. Moneyweb reports that amid the attack, Liberty could face fines if the regulator finds that its IT systems are poor. Read: Counting the costs of Liberty’s cyber attack 3. Buyers shortlisted for Mercantile Bank Mercantile Bank is on offer, and the Public Investment Corporation, Nedbank, Capitec Bank and a consortium comprised of African investment company Arise and Grindrod Bank are getting in line. They were the four companies that made the cut after Mercantile sifted through the 18 non-binding offers submitted. The short-listed companies will conduct due diligence on the bank in due course, Reuters reports. 4. Murray & Roberts deal with Aveng ties up Murray & Roberts shareholders met on Tuesday to resolve the construction firm’s potential tie-up with rival Aveng, in which 52.06% of shareholders voted in favour of the deal. The M&R board will finalise the terms of the proposed offer with the Aveng board, Reuters reported. On the other hand, the Competition Tribunal limited ATON’s voting rights by 50% less one share, Reuters reported.  ATON is the biggest shareholder in Murray & Roberts and launched a $400 million takeover bid, which M&R rejected, saying it was poor value for shareholders. 5. Government bond selloff weakens Government bonds have not been delivering the same returns to foreign holders in the second quarter as they did in the first quarter. According to Bloomberg, the first quarter saw a 13% return, deeming it the best out of 25 major emerging markets. The economy however took a dip in April, affected by the weakening rand, weakening business confidence and shrinking economy. The rand fell to a 6-1/2 month low at R13.88 to the dollar at 7:05 GMT on Tuesday.