Here’s what caught our attention on Friday: 1. Digesting the National Health Insurance announcement Health Minister Aaron Motsoaledi announced the government’s plans to go forward with a National Health Insurance, a scheme that it says will reduce the costs of private healthcare and will ensure that the majority of South Africans have access to an acceptable standard of healthcare. Motsaoledi was speaking at a press briefing on Thursday. The NHI fund would buy accredited services from private and public facilities. The scheme is expected to be implemented in 2026, Bloomberg has reported. Listen to the podcast: What the NHI means for consumers 2. Unions join forces to present wage proposal Wage negotiations between the Eskom board and Eskom employees are still underway. In the latest, unions have come forward and said that they reject the 4.7% increase, and the four-year wage inflation-rated increases that the board proposed earlier this week. Trade unions representing workers are calling for a 9% wage increase in the first year of the agreement, a 8.6% increase in the second year and 8% in the third year. Read: What Eskom workers really earn 2.0 3. The Post Office reassures its capability in Sassa takeover The South African Post Office (Sapo), which is set to take over the distribution of social grants from Net1’s Cash Paymaster Services (CPS) in September, says that the public should be more confident in its ability to carry out the task. The Post Office has already taken over a large portion of grant payments from CPS in April, and will now have to administer cash payments to 2.5 million remaining beneficiaries once the CPS contract ends in August. 4. Tshwane imposes new rates on telecommunications The City of Tshwane is not playing with prices when it comes to the deployment of new telecommunication infrastructure. TechCentral is reporting that Tshwane will be imposing new increased rates on the infrastructure, which will make it more expensive to deploy new telecoms networks, including fibre. The new rates, include a refundable security deposit of R250 000 and R15 000 for a single way leave application. 5. Quilter’s new dawn Following Old Mutual’s announcement of an unbundling earlier this year, a new dawn awaits for Quilter, previously known as Old Mutual Wealth Management. Quilter is due to list on the JSE and LSE next week. Moneyweb is reporting that the sector may grab the attention of the UK market sooner rather than later because it is already established in the market and has a reputation for high-end wealth management. Old Mutual has set a price range of 125p to 155p per share for up to 9.6% of ordinary shares of Quilter ahead of the listing.