Moneyweb financial journalist Ray Mahlaka has bagged the South African Property (Sapoa) Property Feature Journalist of the Year award for his coverage of the sector from April 2017 to March 2018. Congrats to Ray Mahlaka @RayMahlaka from Moneyweb for winning YOUNG Property Journalist of the Year IN THE SAPOA Journalism Awards for Excellence #SAPOA18 pic.twitter.com/RpPsq07stH — SAPOA (@SAPOA_SA) June 21, 2018  The awards were held on Thursday evening at a gala evening in Durban and come after the last few days in which the Sapoa conference was underway. Top property journalists were selected across five categories and Mahlaka’s 2018 win, which falls in category three, makes him a four-time Sapoa award winner. It is also the second time in a row that he has been selected in the feature journalist category. The awards, which have been in existence for years, aim to honour journalists who have made a noteworthy contribution to the commercial and industrial property industry through quality coverage. Mahlaka’s articles, Box ticking in the property sector and SA’s big mall pall, stood out the most among nine nominees in the category for the Sapoa judging panel. Entries were judged based on content relevance and value to the property industry and accuracy of researched information, among other criteria. Journalists were also required to write an essay motivating why their submissions deserve to win, a critical part of the process. Mahlaka’s emphasised the need for the profession during current times to interrogate “pressing issues” like transformation and value destruction. The investigative pieces he has produced for Moneyweb have shed light on allegations facing property group Resilient, empowering readers with knowledge to make informed decisions. This is what he sees as the magic of journalism, “the ability to empower people with knowledge”. Mahlaka was up against well-respected names within the community of South African property writers from the likes of Financial Mail, Business Day and Asset Magazine.