Here’s what caught our attention on Friday: 1. Eskom offers wage increase The Eskom board has made another offer to workers. This time they are offering an above inflation wage increase of 6.2% for 2018, CPI + 0.75% or 6% in 2019 and CPI + 0.5% or 6% in 2020. Unions representing workers are yet to confirm if they accept this offer. Moneyweb is reporting that if they do, it will apply from April 1, this year. Meaning that workers would be paid for the months which have passed. Unions first demanded a 15% increase, but later adjusted their demands to 9%. 2. Sibanye-Stillwater facing backlash for miner fatalities To date, 21 miners have died in Sibanye-Stillwater’s gold mines this year. The mining company is facing backlash by unions and recently a law firm for the deaths. Bloomberg reported that the deaths at the company account for at least half of the 47 people killed in mines in SA in 2018. Meanwhile, a US law firm, Bernstien Liebhard has filed a class-action lawsuit on behalf of shareholders against Sibanye-Stillwater, to recover losses suffered following the fatalities. 3. M3 money supply, private sector credit data M3 money supply decreased to 5.73% in May from 6.39% in April. Private sector credit also decreased to 4.56% in May from 5.07% in April, data from Trading Economics showed on Friday. 4. Trade balance for May The data for the balance of trade for May will be released on Friday. According to data from Trading Economics, in April the trade surplus decreased R1.14 billion from a downwardly revised R9.30 billion in March. Trading Economics forecasts an increase of R2.3 billion. 5. EOH division may be up for trade EOH Holdings, the information, communications and technology firm is splitting its divisions, and confirmed on Thursday that it may consider spinning off one of the divisions for trade. The divisions will comprise its ICT business and a new brand Nextec. The separation will be completed in August and both divisions will be overseen by EOH, Bloomberg reported.