Here’s what caught our attention on Tuesday: 1.GDP figures The gross domestic product (GDP) number for the first quarter of 2018 is expected to be released on Tuesday. In the fourth quarter of 2017, GDP advanced 1.5% year-on-year. Data from Trading Economics shows that, that was the highest growth since the first quarter in 2015. Read: First quarter GDP data may knock ‘Ramaphoria’ Update to follow. 2.Star and Tekkie Town in ‘disagreement’ Before market close on Monday, Star issued a statement via Sens saying that, shoe retailer Tekkie Town has lodged claims against Star pertaining to terms of  earn-out agreements. Tekkie Town owners allege these were in place with Steinhoff. Star, on the other hand, is of the opinion that they have no liability in this regard. Read: Star denies legal claim 3.Submit tax returns before October 31 The South African Revenue Services (Sars) announced on Monday their decision to shorten the 2018 tax season by three weeks. Provisional and non-provisional tax payers are therefore expected to file their tax returns by October 31 2018. Acting Sars Commissioner, Mark Kingon says this is to allow Sars additional time to deal with refunds and verifications ahead of the holiday season, Moneyweb reported. 4.Deutsche Bank closes units in SA Deutsche Bank AG, announced on Monday that it plans to close some units in South Africa ahead of a global review of its business. The bank says the advisory, corporate- broking and sponsor-services units will be closed, as part of a turnaround strategy after it reported two straight annual losses in 2016 and 2017, Reuters reported. 5.KPMG trims its base Embattled auditor, KPMG says it will be cutting back at least 400 of its employees as part of a restructuring and restoration plan. The auditor which has been under scrutiny following deals it had with the controversial Gupta family, will also be closing multiple regional offices and will be operating from four hubs only, namely, Johannesburg, Cape Town, Durban and Port Elizabeth. KPMG expects to complete the process by August, Reuters reported.