Here’s what caught our attention on Monday: 1. Mark Kingon’s term extended Finance minister, Nhlanhla Nene has extended acting Sars commissioner, Mark Kingon’s term by an additional 90 days. Kingon was appointed as acting Sars commissioner, following the suspension of the previous commissioner, Tom Moyane, for alleged misconduct. Kingon’s term was meant to come to an end on Monday June 18, but Moyane’s inquiry is still underway. Moneyweb is reporting that Kingon cannot be appointed as the permanent commissioner until the position becomes vacant – either by the Moyane’s dismissal or resignation. 2. PPC results Cement producing company PPC released its results for the financial year ending March 31 2018. PPC is reporting a 23% increase in cash generation from operations to R2.3 billion. Revenue increased 7% to R10.3 billion. Ebitda decreased 9% to R1.9 billion. Basic earnings per share increased 25% to 10 cents and headline earnings per share increased 114% to 15 cents. CEO, Johan Claasen says the group’s performance has been resilient amid tough economic and political events. 3. Invicta results JSE-listed, Invicta Holdings is reporting no increases in revenue for the financial year ended March 31 2018. The group’s revenue was maintained at R9.6 billion and profit attributable to ordinary shareholders before tax provision declined 23% to R526 million. Headline earnings per share before tax provision also fell 23% to 464 cents, and headline earnings per share after specific tax provision of R400 million fell 81% to 90 cents. The group says South Africa’s poor economic conditions resulted in negative growth, while the rest of the regions showed improved growth. 4. New Mining Charter Mining minister, Gwede Mantashe says that for the newly-drafted mining charter, black ownership at permit holding mines must increase to 30% from 26%, which should extend over a five year period. Moneyweb is also reporting that new applicants should have a 30% BEE shareholding, include a 5% free carried interest. 5. What an Eskom worker earns Eskom workers embarked on a protest last week, calling for a 15% pay increase, which state-owned entity, Eskom says it cannot afford. As a result of the protest, Eskom decided to implement loadshedding to cope with electricity supply. Moneyweb has obtained confidential documents which shows what Eskom workers take home annually. Read more here: What Eskom workers really earn