Here’s what caught our attention on Friday: 1. Eskom takes tariff fight to court Power-utility Eskom says it is proceeding with a court review over energy regulator, Nersa’s, decision to grant it a 5.23% tariff increase. This is a blow to Eskom’s application for a 19.9% tariff increase. According to Moneyweb, Nersa said on Thursday that the increase has already taken effect. Jabu Mabuza, the chairman of Eskom said the given increase is not cost reflective. The matter will be taken to the courts within 10 days. 2. Tekkie town two in the tracks The owner of Tekkie Town, Braam van Huyssteen’s, company AJVH Holdings filed applications for three trademarks, a move that confirms his plan to open a rival and a sequel to his previous shoe retailer, Tekkie Town. Van Huyssteen was one of the shareholders of Steinhoff at the time of its implosion. Moneyweb is reporting that he is pursuing multiple strategies to get back what was wrongfully taken from him and other former shareholders. Van Huyssteen has reserved the names TT2, TTSquared and TSquared. 3. Bidvest group business update Bidvest group published a business update for the ten months to April 2018, on Thursday. The group says business so far has been “satisfactory”, against the backdrop of slow economic progress, alongside the contraction of GDP on Wednesday. The group says the acquisitions of Bradcorp and Noonan impacted trading results. Meanwhile, trading profit is also continuing to grow, but at a slower pace compared to what was reported in December 2017. 4. Court says Icasa against data regulations The Johannesburg High Court ordered communications regulator, Icasa, not to implement the new data regulations on Thursday, saying the court must first rule in the matter. Icasa was due to implement regulations concerning data expiry rules, which, according to TechCentral, are meant to protect the consumer. Cell C filed an interdict against Icasa saying the regulator had not given it sufficient time to implement the new data expiry rules. The court, however ordered Icasa to file a responding affidavit in the Cell C application, within 10 days. 5. Alphamin completes drawdown Alphamin Resources made an announcement, via Sens on Friday, saying it has completed a drawdown worth $25 million, under its credit facility of up to $80 million. It has also converted $3.396 million of due debt to Sprott Private Resource Lending, LP, Barak Fund and the company’s 44.86% shareholder, Tremont Master Holdings.