Here’s what caught our attention on Wednesday: 1. Ex-Eskom CFO charged with misconduct The South African Institute of Chartered Accountants (Saica) is charging former Eskom CFO, Anoj Singh with misconduct. Saica says that Singh behaved in a way that was dishonest and discreditable and that his manner of behaviour brought disrepute to the standards of the institution, Moneyweb reported. Singh was suspended by the Eskom board in September, after allegations surfaced of him irregularly awarding contracts to the Gupta family. Singh resigned from the Eskom board in January this year. 2. May inflation rate Consumer price index, (CPI) for May slowed to 4.4% year-on-year, Statistics SA showed on Wednesday. In April, CPI was at 4.5% year-on-year, from 3.8% in March. On a monthly basis, inflation slowed to 0.2% in May from 0.8% in April. Bloomberg is reporting that in May food prices rose at the slowest pace since 2013. 3. Eskom wage negotiations The negotiations over pay increases between the Eskom board and its employees are still underway, but as a starting point, the Eskom board has proposed a 4.7% wage increase to its employees. Bloomberg is reporting that in addition to the increase, Eskom is also offering a four-year pay agreement with inflation guaranteed. Eskom workers embarked on a protest last week, calling for a 15% wage increase, which embattled Eskom says it cannot afford. 4. Tourism in SA drops More bad news for the SA economy with the release of dismal tourism stats for April, which show a 7% decline in foreign arrivals to 1.3 million. Moneyweb is reporting that with Easter falling in March last year and April this year, the results for April alone look particularly bad, but are something of an anomaly. Departures and transits decreased by 9.1% and 4% respectively. The water crisis in Cape Town, may also have impacted the figures significantly, according to Moneyweb. 5. Accelerate Property Fund results Accelerate Property Fund is reporting a property portfolio valued at R12.3 billion, and net asset value growth of 6.9% year-on-year for its financial results ending March 31 2018. Accelerate’s distribution is 57.55 cents per share. Basic earnings per share is at 110.81 cents per share while diluted earnings per share is 109.13 cents per share.