Public Enterprises Minister Pravin Gordhan is reinvigorating the boards of public sector companies in a move to clamp down on corruption and improve the financial performance of essential South African state-owned enterprises. When announcing a new board for Denel, Gordhan emphasised the role of the board in improving the company’s financial position and ensuring good governance. “The changing of the board is the first step we’re taking as government,” he said. “Clearly their role is to ensure that good governance is restored.” Gordhan’s move to change the boards of Denel, Eskom, Transnet and SAA is in line with President Cyril Ramaphosa’s commitment to reforming state-owned enterprises. Monhla Hlahla was appointed Denel chairperson in April this year and said that the board’s priority is to improve the organisation’s financial position. “For the next few months this board will be focused on nothing else but getting the financial statements of 2017-18 right, getting to understand what the core business of Denel is about, and designing a solution as a team.” This highlights the crucial role boards play in determining the financial sustainability of the organisations they steward. It follows that it is essential that board members have the requisite financial skills to understand financial statements, thus empowering them to ask the right questions and properly fulfil their responsibilities as board members. All board members – public, private sector or non-profit – should ensure that they can interpret financial statements. They don’t have to be accountants, or experts at finance, but financial literacy is fundamental to effective decision-making at board level. In fact, a study by the Institute of Directors in Southern Africa (IoDSA) found that board composition is one of the most significant governance factors in determining a company’s success and that there is a direct correlation between financially skilled board members and company performance. The buck stops with the board Ultimately, financial statements are the responsibility of directors, and not the auditors. South African legislation states that company directors are responsible for ensuring that financial statements comply with relevant legal requirements. This means that board members can’t hide behind a lack of financial skills when it comes to the way statements are compiled and presented. They are liable and will be held accountable for any misleading information. According to S77 of the South African Companies Act “a director of a company is liable for any loss, damage or costs sustained by the company as a direct or indirect consequence of the director having signed, consented to, or authorised the publication of any financial statements that were false or misleading in a material respect.” The Act further requires a director to “exercise the powers and perform the functions of a director with the degree of care, skill and diligence that may be reasonably expected of a person carrying out the same functions in relation to the company” and states that a director “will have satisfied this obligation if the director has taken reasonably diligent steps to become informed about the matter.” Clearly, basic financial literacy is a prerequisite. A bulwark against corporate scandal Better financial literacy and accountability at board level could guard against not just the degeneration of state assets that the country has witnessed in recent years, but corporate scandals too – such as Steinhoff, the retail giant now facing collapse due to what is repeatedly described in the media as “accounting irregularities”. It is difficult not to question now if the board had sufficient experience and financial literacy to identify that there were perhaps accounting irregularities – and if they did, why could they not ask the right questions to enable them to take corrective action? A clear understanding of financial statements allows directors to really get a sense of what is going on within the company without having to rely on others to explain it to them. It is important to be able to recognise red flags in the numbers and to be able to interrogate what the numbers are showing. Common warning signs to watch out for include high levels of debt or inflated profits. There are many case studies that illustrate how companies have tried to inflate current earnings or deflate expenses to make their results seem better on paper. Financial literacy gives board members the skills and confidence to recognise this. If things seem too good to be true, they usually are. The move to shake up boards at South Africa’s state-owned enterprises can only be welcomed. However, changing the guard on its own may not be enough. If we want to rebuild and strengthen governance and restore the financial position of these crucial entities so that they can fulfil their economic and developmental mandates, as Gordhan has called for, we also need to champion greater financial literacy and accountability for those who sit on their boards. Associate Professor Mark Graham convenes the Understanding Financial Statements for Directors short course at the UCT Graduate School of Business.