Here’s what caught our attention on Wednesday: 1. Telkom announces new CFO Telecommunications provider Telkom has announced a new chief financial officer, Tsholofelo Molefe, effective July 1. Molefe has been with Telkom since 2016, first as a deputy CFO, and later as the chief risk and compliance officer. Molefe takes over from Deon Fredericks, who will now assume the role as chief investment officer, from June 30. Read more here. 2. Developments in the Sars inquiry The first day of the Commission of Inquiry into Tax Administration and Governance at Sars, saw the Minister of Public Enterprises, Pravin Gordhan, take the stand as the first witness. Gordhan testified on events during his tenure as Sars Commissioner from 1999 to 2009. He came forward in denying that Sars was ‘in a mess’ when suspended commissioner, Tom Moyane ordered a review of its structure and operations in 2014/2015. He however did say the review and the revelations from the GuptaLeaks helped ‘connect the dots’ in state corruption, Moneyweb reported. The proceedings continue on Wednesday. 3. Ansys financial results Software design company, Ansys, is reporting a revenue decrease of 29% to R527.6 million for its reviewed provisional financial results for the year ending March 31 2018. The company is reporting that gross margin improved to 28.3% from 26.3% in 2017. Headline earnings per share fell by 50% to 7.29 cents, and tangible net asset value increased to 39.9 cents. 4. Christo Wiese places Shoprite stocks In an attempt to raise money to boost his liquidity since the downfall of Steinhoff, in which he was the biggest investor, billionaire Christo Wiese placed his stocks in grocer and retailer Shoprite. Wiese sold about R4.2 billion in shares in Shoprite over three separate deals since the Steinhoff implosion. Wiese raised about R3.6 billion through the placement, Bloomberg is reporting. 5. Stats to look out for today StatisticsSA will be releasing a report showing the national government financial stats for 2017 on Wednesday. It will also be releasing the provincial community surveys of each province for 2016. Update to follow.