Here’s what caught our attention on Friday: 1. Steinhoff’s disposal of Kika/Leiner Steinhoff announced the disposal of Austrian furniture business unit, Kika/Leiner. Reuters reported last week that the business was not able to find a new credit insurer. Amid insolvency issues as a result, Steinhoff announced on Friday that the company has accepted a conditional offer from GmbH to sell the Kika/Leiner operating companies. Bloomberg is reporting on Friday that the assets will be sold to Rene Beneko Signa Holding GmbH. No pricing details have been confirmed yet. 2. Nersa passes tariff increase for Eskom Following a back and forth between Eskom’s request for increased tariffs and Nersa’s reluctance to do so, the energy regulator on Thursday awarded Eskom R32.7 billion (spread over three years). This is R34 billion less than the R66.7 billion it had applied for. This is good for Eskom (for now) as it allows it breathing space to cover costs, however this could translate into a 15% tariff increase Moneyweb reported. 3. Case against suspended Sars commissioner Tom Moyane, the Sars commissioner who was suspended in March for misconduct has been facing an inquiry with lawmakers. According to Bloomberg, Moyane is being accused of failing to inform his political superiors of an alleged unusual cash deposit made by Moyane’s deputy into his own account and for allegedly sending an illegal confidential report, filed by the Financial Intelligence Centre to his deputy. The matter is being overseen by Pravin Gordhan. Moyane denies any wrongdoing. 4. Power not guaranteed amid strikes Eskom implemented stage one load shedding on Thursday night to cope with the demands for electricity as it was forced to close some operations as workers protested for pay increases. Workers are demanding a 15% pay increase, which Eskom says it can’t afford. A spokesperson for Eskom said if workers do not return to work on Friday power again may not be guaranteed. Unions say they are planning a picket on Friday from 12pm, Reuters reported. 5. Suspected fraud at FPI The Financial Sector Conduct Authority (FSCA) instructed the Financial Planning Institute (FPI) on Thursday not to conduct any regulatory exams for financial advisors or brokers until further notice, as the FSCA has concerns about integrity and irregularities in the examination process. Moneyweb is reporting that an investigation is underway at the FPI.