Successful whistle-blowing efforts are vital in the financial services industry, and all role-players have a responsibility to act should an entity fail to effectively implement regulations and damage the integrity of the industry. Financial service providers (FSPs), fund advisors, investment consultants and boards of trustees should each act in the best interests of the members of a fund. Pension funds are especially critical to ensuring the financial prosperity and support of many South Africans. It is therefore unacceptable to abuse this asset in any way, mismanage it and not do everything in one’s power to protect other people’s hard-earned money. If any of these role players fail to act appropriately, it falls on the rest to follow effective whistle-blowing procedures. So what happens if one weak link in this structure brings down the entire house of cards – for example, when a board of trustees acts against the best interests of its members and instead acts in their own best interest. Would the fund’s members become aware of this, and how? Who speaks up on their behalf? Such a challenging situation ultimately falls to the FSPs. It is up to them to not only identify the mismanagement, but to blow the whistle on their own client. It is an unwanted task coupled with consequences, but it is their duty to uphold the law and act in the best interests of the members of a fund. Such a duty is becoming increasingly necessary. Many stories are being reported on pertaining to pension fund mismanagement, most recently the Municipal Councillors’ Pension Fund (MCPF). While these stories bring to light the misconduct, extra vigilance and effective collaboration required by FSPs and regulatory bodies such as the Financial Services Conduct Authority (FSCA) must be upheld to mitigate these instances and prevent further incidents from taking place. When Novare Actuaries and Consultants (NAC) was made aware of the MCPF Isago property transaction, we had to act accordingly by reporting the mismanagement to the FSCA. As the investment advisors to the fund, our duty was to advise the board of trustees in accordance with Regulation 28, provide a suitable investment strategy, and allocate the funds accordingly. The Isago property investment was not one of our recommendations. It is important to note that the appointed investment consultant to a fund cannot prescribe to the board of trustees (of the fund) which investment decision to make. We began to suspect levels of misconduct when the MCPF failed to include us in relevant meetings, took decisions without consultation, and provided limited information to the investment advisors. These actions led us to believe the MCPF was deliberately keeping us in the dark. NAC was forced to act when the investment had already been approved and we were requested to allocate the funds. We warned the MCPF board of trustees about the potential breaches that might occur due to asset outflows, and interrogated the advisor who put forth the investment proposal regarding the merits of the valuation done insofar as possible. However, they claimed confidence in their valuation. As such, the board took decisions which were clearly against Regulation 28 and then tried to overcome the transgression by requesting exemptions from the FSCA. The behaviour of the board led NAC to conduct its own investigation, which ultimately resulted in the whistle-blowing effort with the FSCA. While nothing prevents a fund from investing in direct property, being an important asset class in any diversified investment portfolio, it requires specialised expertise. Last year, the FSCA successfully applied for the MCPF – which has nearly 6 000 members – to be placed under curatorship in the North Gauteng High Court. The curators have since referred this matter to The Hawks in terms of the Prevention and Combating of Corrupt Activities Act. Had NAC failed to act in terms of it whistle-blowing efforts, the consequences would have been dire. This incident serves as a reminder to all members of the investment community to act in accordance with the regulatory frameworks and to remember their roles in the management of pension funds. It is to protect the members of the pension fund and act in their best interests. Derrick Roper – Group CEO at Novare Holdings