Tesla’s board formed a special committee to evaluate Elon Musk’s proposal to take the electric-car maker private, a day after the chief executive officer revealed more on who will advise him and help fund the potential deal. Independent directors Brad Buss, Robyn Denholm and Linda Johnson Rice will comprise the committee, which hasn’t yet received a formal proposal from Musk, according to a Tesla statement Tuesday. They haven’t reached any conclusion on whether taking the company private is advisable or feasible. Musk, 47, set off a firestorm a week ago with his highly unconventional announcement of the effort to take a company off the public markets and has been drip-feeding details since in tweets and blog posts that have preempted Tesla’s board. The chairman and CEO wrote late Monday that he’s getting advice from Goldman Sachs and private-equity firm Silver Lake and has lined up legal advisers. Earlier in the day, he said Saudi Arabia first approached him with interest in helping take Tesla private early last year. Tesla shares opened up 0.5% to $358.17 as of 9:30 am Tuesday in New York. The stock remains well below the $420 level at which Musk has said existing shareholders could be bought out if they choose, underscoring investor skepticism that the deal is doable. While Tesla considers Buss to be an independent director, major proxy advisory firms Institutional Shareholder Services and Glass Lewis don’t because he served as the chief financial officer of SolarCity  before Tesla acquired the company in 2016. Denholm is the chief operating officer of Telstra, Australia’s largest telecommunications company. Rice, who leads Johnson Publishing, known for Ebony magazine, is one of the two newest directors on the board. Tesla appointed her and James Rupert Murdoch, the CEO of Twenty-First Century Fox, to the board in July 2017. The Tesla board’s special committee has hired Latham & Watkins for legal counsel and plans to retain an independent financial adviser to assist its review, according to the statement. The company has separately retained Wilson Sonsini Goodrich & Rosati for legal counsel.