The heated debate between proponents of property protection and those in favour of confiscation (expropriation without compensation) has been characterised by a lack of data, and waged mainly on ideological and emotional arguments. The lack of an acceptable factual basis is evident in: – Government, AgriSA and AfriForum operating with different figures for categorising land ownership according to race, and murkiness around the number of farms on the list for the first round of expropriation (if there is such a list). – Uncertainty about the number of recipients of free subsidy houses (where transfer of title has not taken place) and how these properties should be counted. – Arguments that expropriation would kill the economy simply being countered with promises that the economy would not be harmed. At public consultations, the facts applied were almost always derived from (and limited to) local situations and narratives with no or little attention to systemic information. The Enterprise Observatory of SA (EOSA) therefore analysed last year’s World Economic Forum (WEF) Global Competitiveness Index to assess whether there are some global indicators to inform the debate. Several significant correlations are evident from the WEF data: It’s important to note that big-data approaches are less concerned with the question of causality when encountering significant correlations: a strong symbiosis between two factors enables forecasting – if one factor is in decline, the other’s stability will suffer, and vice versa. Property rights and global competitiveness go hand-in-hand Source: EOSA, World Economic Forum Global Competitiveness Index 2017/18 From the 137 countries dealt with in the 2017/18 Global Competitiveness Index (GCI), it’s clear that strong protection of property rights fosters a high ranking in global competitiveness. In 2007/8, 31 of the 40 most competitive countries were among the 40 with the strongest protection of property rights. This does not imply that strong protection of property rights is directly propelling countries to become more globally competitive, but it does imply that without strong property protection, a country is unlikely to be in the top league of economically competitive countries. South Africa’s decline: In the 2007/8 ranking, SA almost made it into the top 40: it was in position 23 on the protection of property rights and 42 on the GCI. Ten years later it has slipped to 56 and 61, dropping 33 and 19 places respectively. This was before the embrace by the ANC of expropriation without compensation. Protection of property rights is a twin of high per-capita GDP Protection of property rights is significantly correlated with per-capita GDP. In 2017/18, the 23 countries with a per-capita GDP higher than the US’s $38 000 could be found under the 31 countries with the strongest regard for and protection of property rights. Source: EOSA, World Economic Forum Global Competitiveness Index 2017/18 The same held true in 2007/8: the 19 countries with a (then) per-capita GDP above $30 000 could be found under the 30 countries with the best protection of property rights. South Africa’s decline: In the 2007/8 GCI, South Africa was in position 23 for protection of property rights, with a 2005 per-capita GDP of $6 126. In the 2017/18 index, SA has slipped to position 56 in protecting property rights, and its per-capita GDP declined by 15% to $5 261. Strong protection of property rights is just as essential for attaining a high per-capita GDP as for being among the most competitive internationally. Crime against business Protection of property rights deals with fixed and movable assets, patents, copyright and other intellectual property. Factors playing a role in the protection of such property rights involve – in addition to policy and legislation – effective crime prevention, protection of rights and the heeding of court verdicts. The embrace of expropriation without compensation by the ANC, with a commitment to changing the constitution, has loosened most wheel nuts. SA excels in inefficient policing and crime undermining business Source: EOSA, World Economic Forum Global Competitiveness Index 2017/18 WEF data indicates a very strong correlation (R1/$0,8571) between efficient policing and a low cost of crime to business. Unfortunately, South Africa is firmly entrenched as one of the five countries with the highest cost of crime for business and one of the 20 worst police services. Trying to grow with a dismal police service is like running a race in leg-irons Source: EOSA, World Economic Forum Global Competitiveness Index 2017/18 To promote private sector investment and stimulate economic growth in such conditions is a tall order. It is akin to striving to win the 100-metre sprint at the Olympic Games in leg-irons. (Read how high criminality and dismal policing is undermining South Africa’s economy.) Warning shots across the bow Government is tampering with property rights in so-called pursuit of economic growth and an equitable society. There is no systemic evidence that this route will foster growth. The WEF data shows that growth is intricately interwoven with effective policing and the protection of property rights. One can only wonder why government is pursuing populist policies at a time when the country is hanging on by its fingernails, hoping to avoid tumbling into the black hole of a consensus junk status by rating agencies. In March, Moody’s kept SA’s investment grading a notch above junk, raising prospects from negative to stable. This was based on “the recent change in political leadership appear(ing) to have halted the gradual erosion of the strength of SA’s institutions.” However, Moody’s warned: – “Significant uncertainties remain. Risks are tilted to the upside. The departmental cuts required to support the increased spending on education announced under the previous Presidency will test policymakers and administrators alike. – “The authority and capacity of the incoming administration remains to be tested. The divisions within the ANC present policymakers with conflicting priorities which create policy uncertainty.” – “It remains uncertain how the government will pursue its objectives regarding land appropriation … or what impact that will have on production and security. How government acts will provide insights into how it plans to balance nearer-term economic objectives (to sustain confidence and promote investment) against longer-term social and economic objectives.” Moody’s expected quick moves: “South Africa’s ratings would be placed on negative outlook or for downgrade, and eventually downgraded if it were to become clear that government’s commitment or capacity to engineer revived growth and debt stabilisation were to falter … Moody’s would consider government’s success in delivering planned structural reforms in the period between now and the 2019 elections.” Apart from these three warning shots by Moody’s, the International Monetary Fund, in its July 30 statement, also warned about the debt of state-owned enterprises, a too-large public sector wage bill, and government “spending more resources but getting weaker outcomes in education and health than other countries that spend less.” With elections expected in April/May 2019, at least 50% of the window of opportunity granted by Moody’s has closed. Little of substance has materialised to counter these warnings. Government undermines economic growth Is the lack of focus (remember Ramaphosa’s New Dawn unrelenting focus on growth promise) driven by an attempt to hide government’s failures in effective policing and service delivery in education, health, water and sanitation to name a few – or camouflage its incapacity to implement effective turnaround strategies? Or is lack of economic understanding a major constraint? Charles Simkins of the Helen Suzman Foundation recently lamented that “there seems to be a lack of clarity about the limits of government relationships with markets” and that “parliament has insufficient economic expertise among its members.” That holds true for most national departments (apart from treasury), and a lack of understanding of basic economics is even more common in provincial and municipal bureaucracies. Had government channeled the energy that went into creating policy uncertainty around property rights to radically reform the police service by increasing its efficiency, conditions for growth and investment would have improved. Government is failing in its constitutional obligation to protect its citizens and their property by running one of the worst police services in the world. In so doing, it is burdening growth, development and job creation, and making South Africans poorer – with per-capita GDP declining by 15% from 2007 to US $5 261 in 2017. Considering that a deputy minister of finance suspected (in 2016 already) that the country’s top investigative unit was compromised, one can expect with certainty that South Africa will struggle to maintain its existing rankings on both the WEF Global Competitiveness Index and the Fraser Institute’s Economic Freedom Index. Both of these are due for release in the next month. Watch this space. A data-informed message from business to government As the WEF figures indicate, there is sufficient data to demonstrate the importance of strong protection of property rights (including effective policing) in order to: (a) be internationally competitive, (b) become a high-income country, and (c) further foreign direct investment. The challenge for the private sector is to engage government and secure its commitment to improving policing at crime-prevention and effective-investigative levels. This has to be done through the introduction of a publicly available data-based monitoring system. At police station level, the crime chain should be recorded – from incidents reported and charges laid, through to effective investigative work, arrests, prosecution and court verdict. It’s time for government to provide services of standard for the taxes that are being paid. * Johannes Wessels is director of the Enterprise Observatory of SA. His original article can be viewed here.