Here’s what caught our attention on Friday: 1. Standard Bank PMI The Standard Bank Purchasing Manufacturing Index (PMI) for July is expected to be released on Friday. In June the Standard Bank PMI rose to 50.9 from 50 in May, indicating an improvement in the private sector since February. Update to follow. 2. JSE results indicate positive sentiment in SA The Johannesburg Stock Exchange (JSE) released its results for the six months ended June 30, 2018 on Thursday. The stock trader’s operating revenue increased by 7% to R1.2 billion, while costs decreased by 5% to R613 million. Ebitda increased 29% to R582 million, earnings per share increased 33% to 654.7 cents and headline earnings per share increased by 34% to 654.6 cents per share. CEO Nicky Newton-King told Moneyweb the improvement is an indication of positive sentiment in the country, as activity picked up across all of the group’s market segments. Read:  JSE to review its listing requirements 3. Mondi results Paper manufacturer, Mondi is reporting a ‘strong financial performance’ for the six months ended June 30, 2018. The company’s underlying Ebitda increased 17% to €852 million, with a margin of 22.9%. Basic underlying earnings increased 26% to 89.2 euro cents per share. The company says cash generated from operations is also up 18%. An interim dividend per share of 21.45 euro cents has been declared. 4. Aton cramping M&R’s style The race between Aton and M&R to acquire Aveng is like the business version of ‘who gets the girl’. In a recent development, Aton appealed to the Takeover Special Committee, requesting the Takeover Regulation Panel’s approval of Murray & Roberts bid to complete its merging with Aveng to be overturned. Aton has been for months trying to acquire all of Murray & Roberts shares, however, Aton says Murray & Roberts’s bid to merge with Aveng is frustrating Aton’s plans and ‘M&R’s Aveng plans do not make sense’, according to Moneyweb. 5. Solidarity accepts Eskom’s offer One out of the three unions currently in wage negotiations with the utility have decided to accept its latest wage offer to workers. Solidarity union says it accepts a salary increase of 7.5% this year and 7% for the next two years, plus an inflation-linked increase in housing allowance as well as a once-off cash payment of R5 000 for the workers it represents. Eskom has been at a pendulum with unions over wage increases for its workers. The National Union of Mineworkers and the National Union of Metalworkers SA are still discussing Eskom’s wage offer with its workers, Reuters reported.