There might be some slight joy for the majority of black investors in Sasol Inzalo – the R28 billion empowerment scheme the oil and chemicals group launched in 2008 – as they stand to receive a portion of cash as dividends when the scheme expires in September. About 270 000 Inzalo investors faced the risk of not receiving anything after 10 years of being invested in the scheme because Sasol’s share price was battered by volatile oil prices and the rand. For investors to benefit from Inzalo, which holds 10% of Sasol group shares, Sasol’s share price had to have appreciated from its long-held level of R370 to above R480 when the scheme expires on September 7. At the appreciated levels, Inzalo would be able to repay the more than R7 billion debt owed to the banks that financed the scheme in 2008, when investors were invited to invest a minimum R18.30 to purchase each Inzalo share. Until recently, Sasol’s share price barely traded above the R370 levels, pushing the scheme below water as it couldn’t pay off debt and at the same time reward investors with dividends. This underscored the dangers of having empowerment schemes that call for investors to participate through debt funding while investing in assets that rely on volatile commodities to create value. Dividend prospects However, the recently elevated international oil prices and a weaker rand have worked in favour of Sasol’s share price, which has traded in a narrow range of R502 to R548 since June –well above the R480 level required to benefit Inzalo investors. Sasol says at the current group share price level, Inzalo investors will gain a portion of cash that would be distributed as dividends when the scheme expires. Using a 30-day volume weighted average share price of R512.66 as at August 17, there might be cash remaining to distribute to investors after settling Inzalo’s outstanding debt and other costs including capital gains tax. In determining the cash to be distributed, Sasol will repurchase 16.1 million Sasol shares held by Inzalo on September 7 at a 30-day volume weighted average price to be determined by September 6. Assuming the 30-day volume weighted average price is R512.66 at September 6, the value of the shares would be R8.3 billion and, after subtracting bank debt (R7.4 billion), R853 million might be distributed to Inzalo investors. But the value of the dividend payment to investors hinges on the 30-day volume weighted average price of Sasol shares by September 6. On top of the cash to investors, depending on the 30-day volume weighted average price, investors who hold 25 Inzalo shares would receive one Sasol share. This, Sasol says, would result in approximately 80% of Inzalo investors receiving less than five Sasol ordinary shares each. Free shares, Khanyisa scheme Craig Gradidge, an independent financial planner at Gradidge Mahura Investments, says Sasol made the right decision to explore dividend payments to investors rather than to unbundle the shares after Inzalo expires. After Inzalo expires, it will be replaced by Sasol Khanyisa, a new R21 billion empowerment scheme that will run for 10 years. Khanyisa will provide black investors with 25% equity ownership of Sasol’s South African operations. Although the Inzalo dividend might not be substantial, Gradidge says the fact that Sasol has offered investors various free shares is a good incentive. “The real return might end up being free shares,” he says. Inzalo investors were offered the option to convert into Khanyisa shares, where they would receive 10 bonus Sasol BEE Ordinary shares (known as SOLBE1, which has no debt), which are tradeable on the black segment of the JSE. Soria Hay, the head of corporate finance at Bravura Capital, says Khanyisa is expected to remove several risks, including not using Sasol’s share price to determine the value of its assets relative to debt. “The fact that the scheme is also on a South Africa level [investment in Sasol’s local businesses] is good. Also making the scheme good is that it’s not externally funded by banks, but internally funded by Sasol,” she says.