The president’s unfettered discretion to appoint a Commissioner for the South African Revenue Service (Sars) came under the spotlight at the Nugent Commission of Inquiry on Wednesday, with a Treasury official arguing that legislation introduced in the wake of 1994 did not foresee a scenario where a “bad” minister or president could be appointed. Sars has been under fire for missing its revenue targets, and its Commissioner Tom Moyane – who was previously appointed by president Jacob Zuma – has been suspended amid allegations of misconduct. National Treasury deputy director-general Ismail Mononiat said it did not yet have an official view on how Sars should be governed, but over the last few months it became clear that legislation such as the Public Finance Management Act (PFMA) and the Sars Act that came into effect shortly after 1994, only envisaged situations where “good” ministers and “good” director-generals would be appointed. At the time, they thought Parliamentarians would not tolerate any corruption. Against this background, the legislation wasn’t stress tested for bad scenarios. This was the case for the PFMA and arguably also for the Sars Act, which was developed in 1997. Although the act dealt with appointment processes and the Katz Commission’s recommendations were considered, it did not explicitly deal with scenarios where a “bad commissioner” was appointed. “I think what we learned was actually you could have a bad minister. You could have a bad president. You could have a bad DG [director-general]. You could have parliamentarians who actually didn’t exercise their oversight very vigorously.” “What is clear is that the Commissioner is too powerful. The Sars Act is written where everything vests in the Commissioner. Everything – the structure, the bonuses, etc.” The Davis Tax Committee has previously raised concerns about the president’s “unfettered discretion” to appoint the Sars head (in light of Zuma’s appointment of Moyane) and recommended that the commissioner should rather be appointed in the same vein as the public protector or by the Minister of Finance directly to improve transparency and accountability. Judge Robert Nugent, who chairs the inquiry, suggested that power ultimately had to rest somewhere and that it couldn’t be divided. Even if the Minister of Finance was allowed to appoint the Commissioner instead of the president, this would not protect the system against the appointment of a bad Minister of Finance. Against this background, he suggested that the system should have appropriate checks and balances in place to deal with these scenarios. Momoniat said appointment mechanisms were “very poor”, but argued that the problem was not specific to Sars. Another example is the National Prosecuting Authority. Momoniat said there was currently almost no process for appointing a Commissioner (apart from the president announcing the appointment) and a more robust process was necessary, including potential public hearings and an opportunity for parliamentary committees to raise issues about the appointment. Treasury director-general Dondo Mogajane said previously a Commissioner would write to the Minister of Finance to request leave or approval for an international tour and recommend who should act in the position in the meantime. However, at some point in the last few years, this relationship broke down, and the Commissioner argued that he was not accountable to the Minister as he was appointed by the president. Mogajane said this put a clog in the system and affected revenue streams. “Accountability is at the heart of this… There must be a layer of accountability – whether it is an advisory panel, or whether it is a board – where they can keep the Commissioner accountable,” he said. Treasury has indicated that it would provide the commission with a memorandum with recommendations.