Investors in Imperial Holdings’ preference shares were dealt a blow recently with the news that the JSE-listed motor vehicle and logistics player plans to buy out all of its preference shares. The buyout is not at the issue price of the shares. Instead Imperial has offered to buy them back at R83 plus any dividends that may accrue during the offer period. This means preference shareholders will take a capital loss on this deal, while ordinary shareholders will benefit from a R64 million addition to net asset value. Admittedly this is negligible once divided between the 202 million shares in issue. Preference shares were issued in two tranches:  # of pref shares issued Price/share at issue Preference share capital outstanding Repurchase price Difference 21 Nov, 2006 3 000 000 R100  R83  25 June, 2007 1 540 041 R97.40 R83  TOTAL    R450m  R441m R377m R64m Source: Moneyweb The rationale behind the redemption of the preference shares stems from the separation of Imperial Group into Imperial Logistics and Motus, which is the integrated motor vehicle side of the group operating across the value chain (import, distribution, retail, rental, aftermarket parts, and vehicle-related financial services). “As per the preference share agreement, the holders are not entitled to participate in the unbundling,” says Zwelakhe Mnguni, CIO at Benguela Global Fund Managers. “This means that if the shares remained unredeemed they would only have exposure to Imperial Logistics post unbundling and not to Motus.” Of course, shareholders would have acquired their shares on the strength of the logistics and Motus businesses together. It is worth noting that Motus is also the more cash generative part of the business, generating 59% and 55% of group revenue and operating profit respectively, with 13% of foreign operating profit. “This redemption provides preference shareholders with a liquidity event to exit their investment in the group as a whole rather than being forced to remain invested in a security whose characteristics have fundamentally changed,” Mnguni adds. As per Imperial’s balance sheet as at FY2017, the carrying value of the 4 540 041 preference shares is R441 million or R97 par value per share. Imperial will be redeeming 100% of these shares at R83, which totals R377 million. The difference is a gain to Imperial of R64 million. Given that these preference shares have no maturity date, there is no liability on Imperial Group to pay shareholders the R97 par value of these shares. Preference shareholders would, therefore, trade these securities as a stock – the higher the market price, the more preferable. As seen in the chart below, the last time these shares traded close to par was 2012. On unbundling, these shareholders would have access to the less diversified Imperial Logistics business only.  Source: Benguela Global Fund Managers “The redemption offer of R83 per preference share provides a 29% premium to the closing price of R64.29 on August 10, 2018, which was the last trading date prior to the announcement. The last time these shares traded close to the R80 level was 2014. It could be said that the discount to par would widen [rather] than close on unbundling. Current preference shareholders, therefore benefit from this exit opportunity and the premium offered,” Mnguni says. According to Imperial Group IR manager Esha Mansingh, the offer is based on a market-related yield and valuation, which is also supported by a fair and reasonable opinion. That being said, the argument could still be made that preference shareholders are the losers in this instance, but perhaps fingers cannot be pointed at Imperial. “If you go and read Benjamin Graham and other classic value investing literature, preference shares are advised as ‘to be avoided’,” says Reuben Beelders, portfolio manager at Gryphon Asset Management. “Preference shareholders take ‘equity risk’ – as investors are experiencing now – but as income is set at a percentage of prime you never get to experience the upside that ordinary shareholders can benefit from. So why an equity risk when you are not getting an equity return? “People believe that preference shares are sold with an implicit capital guarantee. While preference shareholders rate ahead of ordinary shareholders in a liquidation event, that is where the guarantees end. So often in financial markets what everyone ‘believes’ and what the letter of the law states is simply not the same thing,” he says. A separate general meeting for shareholders who are eligible to vote on the scheme will be held on September 14, 2018.