Investing on the JSE has not been easy over the last few years. This is not just because returns have generally been weak, but because of a number of company and sector specific issues. The accounting fraud at Steinhoff is obviously the most significant, but there have been a range of problems for investors to deal with. Read: JSE to review its listing requirements Certain local industries, like construction, have been in structural decline, for example. Aveng, which 10 years ago was a top 40 company with a share price of over R50, now trades at under 10 cents. Managers of a number of local companies have also made very poor capital allocation decisions, often involving overseas acquisitions. Brait’s purchase of New Look in the UK and Woolworths’ buyout of Australia’s David Jones are two prominent examples. In the property sector, the Resilient group of companies has lost significant value as questions have been raised about its complicated structure and the premium at which the companies traded to their net asset values (NAVs). As Truffle Asset Management’s chief investment officer Iain Power explained during a ‘Meet the Managers’ presentation in Cape Town last week: “There have been some question marks from an aggressive accounting perspective, but the biggest issue that you could pick up straightaway was that Resilient was very expensive,” he said. “Why should it be trading at a 70% premium to NAV? There was no basis for that.” Making sense of it This has created a very difficult environment for investors to navigate. It’s not just individuals that have struggled either. Professional asset managers have been in the thick of it. Steinhoff was in hundreds of unit trust portfolios when Markus Jooste resigned as CEO and the share price collapsed. An analysis conducted by Moneyweb in May last year found that it was the fifth most widely held counter by local managers. The Resilient group of companies had been the main driver of returns for a number of property funds before the shares hit a sharp decline in January this year. Some property unit trusts are down more than 25% over the last six months due to the impact this has had. For Cy Jacobs, co-founder and portfolio manager at 36One, this has raised serious questions about how local companies should be analysed. He told ‘Meet the Managers’ that there are four areas where they identify real difficulties in the local market. Tighter guidance The first is the way that company boards are constituted. He believes there are too many non-executive directors sitting on too many boards, and they are therefore stretched too thin. “We found a certain director sitting on the board of 24 listed companies,” Jacobs said. “That is outrageous. They can’t give every one of those companies enough time.” He added that directors are often hired because they are friends with management, which obviously impacts their ability to be objective. “In time, maybe shareholders need to propose more of these directors, rather than management proposing them and just getting tacit approval,” Jacobs argued. “There really needs to be tighter guidance.” The second issue is the quality of audits. “At 36One we almost ignore who the auditors are and what their reports say because you know that no criminal activity or irregularities really get picked up because these clients have become too big for the auditing firms,” Jacobs said. Managing the managers Thirdly, he raised the issue of companies raising capital simply by getting into an index. “Big companies have realised that as long as they get into an index, ETFs [exchange-traded funds] are going to buy them,” Jacobs said. “They don’t need the active managers any more. If they can cross-reference themselves into enough indices, ETFs will own them from all over the globe.” He suggested that the Resilient group of companies may have been quite clever in doing exactly this by inflating its share prices. However, with index funds accounting for less than 3% of the ownership of the JSE, this is unlikely to be a very successful strategy in the local market alone. What would be more of an issue is active managers who buy up these counters because they closely follow the index, and certainly in the property sector there is a great deal of this. Finally, Jacobs said that many sell-side stockbroking analysts have been found wanting. “They have been accepting whatever management tells them,” Jacbobs argued. “If you looked at Steinhoff reports before it collapsed, and even African Bank back in 2015, analysts were optimistic. They seem to want to believe that companies are going to do better.” How do you identify what to avoid? Overall, the issue for Jacobs is that South African investors can no longer rely on what they used to rely on. This means asset managers have to be prepared to do a lot more of their own research. 36One has now even established its own forensics team to scrutinise company reports and activities, to both identify companies that it should avoid in its long only funds, and possible shorts in its hedge funds. “We just have to be aware that this type of activity exists in the market,” said Jacobs. “I don’t know how it’s going to be stopped, but we have become very focused on what is going on in South Africa in the last few years, and what must be avoided.”