Here’s what caught our attention on Wednesday: 1. State capture inquiry Now that the chamber of (Gupta) secrets has been opened, all is slowly being revealed. Over the past two days, ANC MP, Vytjie Mentor testified at the state capture hearings over how the Gupta brothers attempted to bribe her and offer her the position of Public Enterprises Minister behind closed doors. Moneyweb is reporting that this took place in September 2010, and then president, Jacob Zuma knew and was complicit. On Wednesday, former government spokesperson Themba Maseko will have a go at the inquiry. The Guptas’ lawyers have come forward in saying they would like to cross-examine former deputy finance minister, Mcebisi Jonas, following his testimony on Friday. Jonas said the Guptas offered him a top ministerial position, a bribe and threatened to kill him if he were to out them. Read: Ajay Gupta wants to cross-examine Mcebisi Jonas 2. Sars inquiry The Nugent Commission of Inquiry into tax administration and governance at the South African Revenue Service (Sars) is set to resume on Wednesday. Last week it was revealed that the new operating model implemented by the authorities in 2015, came at the least opportune time and that it was not effective. Last week Moneyweb reported that former chief operating officer, Jonas Makwakwa who was steering the committee at the time, knew that the operating model did not work. Furthermore, Moneyweb is reporting that Sars staff struggled to adapt to the new operating model and were sometimes taken to task for ‘underperformance’. Read: Destruction at Sars: taxpayers not the only losers 3. Steinhoff CFO to appear before lawmakers Former Steinhoff chief financial officer, Ben la Grange will be appearing before parliamentary lawmakers on Wednesday. La Grange was suspened by Steinhoff along with former company secretary Stehan Grobler. This is the first time since Steinhoff’s implosion that action is being taken against those who are said to be involved in the scandal. A week from now, former Steinhoff CEO, Markus Jooste will also be making his first appearance in parliament to answer questions. 4. Adcock Ingram results Pharmaceutical company, Adcock Ingram is reporting a 25.5% increase in headline earnings per share from continuing profits to 387.7 cents for year ended June 30 2018. Headline earnings for the period amounted to R644.7 million from R523.7 million in 2017. The group’s turnover increased by 10% to R6 540 million and gross profit improved by 14% to R2 566 million. Total dividend increased by 24% to 172 cents per share. 5. Land bill withdrawn for further consideration In the latter part of Tuesday, the ANC made an announcement that it has withdrawn the Expropriation Bill passed in 2016 as it reviews Section 25 of the Constitution to see if the expropriation of land without compensation is in fact feasible. The rand responded with a marginal gain. It is not yet known when the review will be completed and what course of action will follow. For now read: What Parliament’s withdrawal of the Expropriation Bill means