Imagine going from your home to the airport and then, post flight, from the airport to your hotel and then your room – all without standing in a queue or digging for your passport or your credit card. Even better, imagine if your baggage was never lost, you were never bumped off a flight, your various loyalty programmes were automatically updated and you were immediately informed of new benefits and how to spend them. The travel industry, as globally interconnected as it is, is prone to a myriad of inconveniences for clients and travel companies alike. Many of these begin right at the booking process. How many times do you have to fill in the same form fields? Once this is done, processing payments – particularly cross border – is a process in itself. And fraud remains a serious issue. Travel merchants lose up to 0.44% a year due to fraud, and 4% of airline bookings result in rejections because of suspected fraud. All of this costs the industry about $4.8 billion a year. Imagine then a technology that could seamlessly share your information, remember – and recognise – who you are and above all, do so in a safe way. Enter blockchain. Although in its infancy this technology has the potential to turn the travel industry on its head. What is blockchain? Blockchain is an incorruptible digital ledger (database for want of a better word) of economic transactions that can be programmed to record not just financial transactions, but everything that holds value (for instance your biometric information). What is notable about it is that the records are irreversible, which means information can only be added to that database and never removed or changed. In addition, information on the blockchain is also publicly available. It’s decentralised, meaning it doesn’t rely on a single computer or server to function. So any transactions are instantly visible to everyone. “Blockchain has the potential to transform the travel industry,” says Lloyd Barkhuizen, FCM Travel Solutions’ head of sales for the Middle East and Africa. “As a global travel business we understand how to harness ‘big data’ and are constantly improving our use of artificial intelligence in our processes, so you can be sure that we are watching the evolution of blockchain closely. However we think it will take another three-to-five years before the technology matures to the point of widespread adoption.” FCM is not alone. In South Africa, National Treasury, working alongside the six largest banks, has successfully trialed interbank settlements using distributed ledger technology (blockchain is just one type). The results show that the typical daily volume of SA’s payments system, averaging R350 billion, could be processed on a distributed ledger in less than two hours – securely. In addition more than 20 of SA’s financial services firms have created the South African Financial Blockchain Consortium which aims to set up a national blockchain with a similar goal: boosting efficiencies and lowering account fees over time. In the travel industry Barkhuizen identifies three ways in which blockchain can make a difference: 1. Passport-free travel and identity management For travellers, blockchain represents an opportunity to pass through passport control more quickly if IBM, Accenture, Google and the many companies working on this succeed in creating verified identification of individuals. An obvious idea is to make this information available via a smartphone or tablet. It is estimated that up to 40 million travel documents have been lost or stolen in recent years. But, through biometrics and blockchain, identities and travel documents can be recorded and permanently stored and accessible with a simple click. This eliminates having to produce these documents at several checkpoints during one’s travel. And credit card information can be stored just as easily. Flight, hotel, and transport is immediately streamlined for the traveller, and government agencies have much greater security as they process travellers. “Last June the Dubai government partnered with UK start-up ObjectTech to bring blockchain-based security to Dubai Airport by combining biometric verification and blockchain technology, and using a ‘preapproved and entirely digitised passport’ to authorise passengers’ entrance into the country,” says Barkhuizen. A similar project is being run by consulting firm Accenture in conjunction with the World Economic Forum. Accenture has developed the Known Traveller Digital Identity System. This blockchain is designed to collect and host identifying information from frequent international travellers, enabling a freer flow of data between travellers and customs agents to smooth the clearance process. 2. Smart contracts There is a huge space for smart contracts within the travel industry. The ‘smart contract’ uses computer software, instead of a legal agreement to implement a contract between two parties which is executed automatically and paid for in digital currency. If a contract threshold is achieved, the contract automatically adjusts itself and payments are made when transaction data is received. So, theoretically, blockchain could help to join up the tripartite transactional relationship between airlines, travel management companies like FCM and their corporate clients. Travellers and travel merchants can record all transactions in a block; loyalty programmes and traveller ‘points’ can be stored in blocks; commission agreements between airlines, hotels and booking agents leave no doubt about who is to be paid what and when; and corporate agreements with travel merchants can be permanently recorded, leaving no room for doubt or hidden fees. Never the type to miss a gap, travel entrepreneurs are turning to both crypto and blockchain in their bid to serve customers better. One example is Cool Cousin. The app connects travellers with locals who act as their ‘cool cousins’ and provide ‘insider’ tips on where to go and what to do in their cities. 3. Fraud prevention While there is low hanging fruit to be enjoyed, fraud prevention is what everyone is excited about and the opportunities in this area are just becoming evident. One simple example lies in hotel bookings. Last year, some 55 million consumers made hotel bookings through websites they thought were legitimate, yet which actually were operated by fraudsters. Blockchain can be used to help consumers verify the properties, and vice versa. Also, with documents and identities stored in blocks, travel merchants won’t have to manually check bookings that are flagged for potential fraud. Traveller information is securely accessible through a blockchain, and losses to fraud are significantly reduced. Travel companies around the world will be watching the rise of blockchain carefully. While many developments will benefit the industry and its clients as a whole, there will be opportunities for smart operators to use blockchain to differentiate their service from the rest. Click here to read the full report on how blockchain technologies will shape the future of travel. Brought to you by Flight Centre Travel Group.