RYK VAN NIEKERK: The independently-owned asset manager, Laurium Capital, celebrated its tenth birthday in July, the company was founded in 2008 by Murray Winckler and Gavin Vorwerg, and they remain the majority shareholders and the portfolio managers across all Laurium’s funds. On the line I have Murray Winckler. Murray, congratulations on your tenth birthday, the growth over the past 10 years has been nothing short of spectacular. You started off with R100 million and this has grown to around R22 billion, how did you achieve this? MURRAY WINCKLER: Thanks Ryk, we are pleased to be celebrating our 10-year birthday. Our timing wasn’t great, we started off on August 1 2008 with running our first fund and six weeks later we had the Lehman’s crisis, so I must say the first year was extremely hairy and volatile but we managed to come through it fairly unscathed. Then, I guess, over time our performance has been decent and I think after three years of running money then people started getting a little bit more comfortable and then our assets started to grow. We started in hedge initially and I guess it was five-and-a-half years ago that we actually went into the long-only space as well because our views with it was that hedge would have grown a lot quicker but it hasn’t, we run just under R4 billion of hedge money. But we are doing a lot of work for a long-only as well and because the hedge side in South Africa as a whole, it’s an industry at the moment that’s only about R50 billion, which is very small, we started running a flexible unit trust and then a long-only unit trust and we managed to gather assets on the way. Today that R22 billion is split, 55% is from international investors and we run R3 billion in Africa, non-South Africa, we’ve been doing Africa for over the last ten years, we have a fund that’s been going there for four-and-a-half years that’s basically just got under R3 billion, a long-only fund, and then our hedge and then the South Africa long-only book has also grown quite nicely. RYK VAN NIEKERK: Murray, take us back to before 2008, why did you and Gavin decide to start your own asset management business and why specifically a hedge fund business? MURRAY WINCKLER: I was with Ivor Jones, a stockbroking firm, we sold out to Deutsche Bank in 1996, it sounds like a long time ago. Then I was at Deutsche Bank for 12 years and I left in 2006. I took a year-and-a-half off, a nice little sabbatical in life and then I decided really what one wanted to do.  I enjoyed very much being on the stockbroking and then on the investment banking side and I was keen to get onto the asset management side and whether one went into a big organisation, there are some nice opportunities there, but at the time I thought hedge would grow significantly faster than what it has, if you look it’s a US$3 trillion globally but in South Africa it’s been very pedestrian. Then Gavin was working in London and I thought I need to get a partner, he came back from London, I waited a few months, then set up the business and so on while I waited for him to come back. He had been there for three years, dragged his wife back and then we started up on the hedge side. I think hedge is also a lot more interesting, so instead of just picking stocks you really like and going long, you have the opportunity to go short on certain stocks that you don’t like, so you’re able to use derivatives a little bit more. So we definitely find that hedge is a little bit more exciting and there are a lot more options of things that you can do. Laurium Long Short Prescient RI Fund RYK VAN NIEKERK: But your flagship fund, the Laurium Long Short Prescient RI Fund, has performed really well since inception and has beaten the Alsi total return index by 0.5% every year and at half the volatility. Why do you think the hedge fund hasn’t been more popular? MURRAY WINCKLER: I think the big issue is that hedge fund fees are high, so I think that’s been a big issue in the pension fund industry, your TERs, with hedge funds you generally charge a 1% management fee and a 20% performance fee, subject to you beating cash on an annual basis. So fees can be quite high, so that’s quite an issue. Our main long-short fund, which you refer to, it’s quite interesting, the market from the day we started has done 10.6% compound per year, which is an overall share total return and we’ve actually done 90 basis points compound per annum better since inception. I think, as you say, the vol has been half at about 7%, versus the market at about 3.5% and then drawdowns, the market had a maximum drawdown of 37%, which was the biggest one and our fund was 10.8%. So we definitely believe there is a strong case for hedge, people need to look at the net returns you get and the vol. So on that basis it’s done pretty well. We have an aggressive version we started five-and-a-half years ago that’s done a net return compound of about 19% against also the market over that time of 10%. There are some other big hedge funds out there that have been around a long time, there are probably a dozen that have done very well over time and have beaten the market at much lower vol. But I think that fees are a big issue and I think that a lot of the industry was that fund of funds were very big in the industry and so pension funds would come directly to a fund of fund and then they would allocate, so you’d get fees on fees, your look-through on fees is quite high. So I think that’s really been quite a big issue for the industry. Then in the retail space, which obviously has come through recently, we still haven’t got hedge funds on platforms for IFAs to go into, so while we do have some high net worth individuals in funds, we still need to get on platforms. So we think that will still result in some reasonable growth going forward but it is a tiny industry, relative to your unit trust industry of probably R2 trillion-plus. Laurium’s invest philosophy RYK VAN NIEKERK: You’ve launched, as you said earlier, your long-only funds five years ago and they’ve also performed really well, what is your broad investment philosophy? MURRAY WINCKLER: Firstly, from a team point of view, we’ve got quite a big team now, initially it was just Gavin, myself and an assistant. After one year we had five on the investment side and today we have 20 individuals, 11 on the investment side. We are very much fundamental, bottom-up is the core of what we do, with a value bias, so we are very orientated in valuations, we look at every company, business assessment, financial assessment and valuation. I think on the financial side it’s one of the areas we delve into quite a lot, whether it’s looking at cash flows, financial structures and so on. We have, it’s not necessarily a good thing these days because the CA profession is under a lot of pressure, but we have across the business probably 13 chartered accountants and about 10 of them are CFA. So very much fundamental, where we are slightly different to a lot of managers out there is that we came from investment banking backgrounds, so there was the derivatives side, underwriting, capital raises, structuring, Gavin was in the equity derivatives structuring team as well for a while, so I think that is slightly different. So we play equity capital markets fairly aggressively in some of our funds. Then the other thing we do is Africa, which is also a little bit different to the others. For instance, our banks and insurance analyst, Matthew Pouncett, would do South Africa plus the rest of Africa, so he’ll be in Kenya, Nigeria, Egypt and he’s doing the South African companies, let’s say Standard, Barclays, which have 20% to 30% of their earnings from the rest of Africa, so he’s seeing the guys on the ground in Nigeria, Kenya, the CEOs, the CFOs, and getting their view, and then seeing the guys here as well, so he can cross-reference, whereas in a lot of other firms the people who do Africa, just do Africa. I think because a lot of South African companies have the rest of Africa as well like MTN, Barlow, that is slightly different, we think it does help a bit relative to some of the other firms out there. Those are the three buckets, I guess. Special situations, capital raises, event-driven stuff we play quite a lot and because we are small enough and nimble enough, okay we’ve got R20 billion or so, so let’s say SA R19 billion, we’re still relatively small against some of the big guys out there. RYK VAN NIEKERK: The R22 billion, or just more than R20 billion you have under management, you earlier said there were many international investors who have invested money through you, who are these international investors and how much of that is directed at other African investments? MURRAY WINCKLER: I guess from our offshore component, which is about 55% would be offshore investors, we have a couple of buckets there, in the long-only space, long-only non-South Africa, which is public, the one is Norwegian Pension Fund, we run some money for them. So that is quite a big investor from offshore for us, they’ve been with us for about three years or so. Then we have another North American investor that is also pretty big, we’re the only manager in South Africa for them and we do South Africa and Africa for them, it’s a pretty big investor. So those are two big long-only mandates, one with a bit of Africa. Then our Africa fund as well, where we have R220 million, that is all from offshore money and probably 65% of the investors would come from the US, Europe, mainly US I think in that fund, and then some pension funds in South Africa that use offshore money to go into Africa with us. So it’s quite diverse, the international side and then a lot of local investors, high net worth individuals here, particularly in our hedge funds, some pension funds but it’s not a lot of pension funds in our local business. Plans for the next ten years RYK VAN NIEKERK: Well, you’ve performed phenomenally well in the first 10 years of Laurium’s existence, so what do you expect or hope to achieve over the next ten years? MURRAY WINCKLER: That’s looking out a long way but I guess with the advent of the passive funds that are coming into the market and I think that there is a place for hedge, there’s a place for long, there’s a place for passive, it depends which markets you want to use passive for. We’re very pleased with where we are at the moment, if we could get similar returns on our funds over the next 10 years, if we are able to in our conservative hedge fund, which is the main long-short fund, if we’re able to do 1% better than the market compound net of fees for the next ten years we’d be very happy. Our aggressive fund has done double the market return, that will be very hard to achieve that going forward, so that’s over five-and-a-half years, and then our long-only funds have done very nicely since inception because our flexible after five years is still the number one flexible fund. I think with all our funds we’d obviously love to be in the top quartile going forward, if not decile, and if we’re able to achieve that we’ll be very happy, and our assets will flow thereafter. But the most important thing is getting good performance, continuing with that. Markets are very tough obviously, a lot of volatility and I think in the last three years markets have done very little, other than last year, this year markets are down a bit. Last year they were up, half the returns in the market last year, 20% was Naspers alone, mid-caps did 7%, small caps did 3% and in the prior year the markets did close to 0%. So it’s been very tough for IFAs out there, for individuals, because there hasn’t been that much beta in the market, cash has been better over three years. Right now with the selloff in emerging markets… it’s a bit scary out there with currencies blowing off like this at the moment. RYK VAN NIEKERK: But I think it’s an ideal time for investors to actually look at the skill of fund managers because it’s easy to show performance in a bull market but in a sideways volatile market, which we are currently seeing, especially in South Africa, the asset managers, who know what they’re doing, they will excel and investors will be able to use that past performance for future investment decisions. MURRAY WINCKLER: There’s not much beta in markets and there’s quite a lot of volatility. The toughest time generally for hedge funds, I think particularly the conservative ones, in strong bull markets they struggle to keep up with the market. But when it’s more moderate markets, moderate returns or very little returns, then generally with the opportunity to go long-short, a bit of vol, it should enable you to generate better returns than just purely your long-only managers. RYK VAN NIEKERK: Thank you, Murray, it seems like you’ve built an excellent foundation in the first ten years of Laurium and I hope it continues to grow at the same trajectory. MURRAY WINCKLER: Thanks very much Ryk, we hope we can continue as we are, steadily grow and make some decent returns for our clients over time. RYK VAN NIEKERK: That was Murray Winckler, one of the founders and portfolio managers at Laurium Capital. Laurium celebrated its tenth birthday in July this year and their achievements over the past decade suggest a very bright future. Brought to you by Laurium Capital.