Healthcare company Adcock Ingram managed to pull a rabbit out of a hat when it announced headline earnings per share (heps) growth of 26% off the back of 10% turnover growth to reach R6.5 billion for the year to June 30. Turnover was driven by a better product mix, which incorporated more higher margin products, a small price increase, and improved volumes. The acquisition of Genop in January also contributed to volume and margin growth. The 90-year old company sells specialised instruments, and surgical and pharmaceutical products into the ophthalmic, optometry, skincare, aesthetic and plastic surgery markets in southern Africa and turned over R400 million in its last financial year. The gross margin improvement from 37.8% to 39.2% was realised from an improvement in the exchange rate, a change in the sales mix and greater efficiencies at the Wadeville factory on the back of increased production of antiretrovirals. In addition well controlled operating expenses (allowing for the additional expenditure consequent to the Genop acquisition) contributed to the 20% improvement in trading profit which increased to R866 million from R724 million last year. All commercial divisions showed an improvement in revenue and trading profit. It seems pain, coughs, colds, flu and allergies persisted – as they do. Turnover in these over-the-counter (OTC) products grew 7.6% to R1.9 billion. In what must be seen as a tick for management, the company was appointed by Abbott Laboratories to market, distribute and sell a range of products, including Brufen, Duphalac and Calmettes. Prescription turnover improved by 15.5% to R2.2 billion and the division also showed double-digit growth in the private market segment. While hospital turnover improved by 7.2% to R1.4 billion, the consumer division showed negative growth and a muted trading profit growth of 2% which must be seen in the light of the challenging consumer environment, as was also reflected in the results of Shoprite, Distell and Massmart. “The positive results were achieved through continued investment in our well-established brands, improved factory efficiencies, and a focus on customer service and product quality,” CEO Andy Hall said at the presentation of the group’s results. “There is no denying that getting 26% heps growth out of 10% revenue growth is amazing,” adds Izak van Niekerk an investment analyst with Mergence Investment Managers. “This is particularly when one considers the price increase granted by the government at 1.26% was the lowest price increase granted since 2011 when no increase was granted.” He cautions though that management has pulled many of the levers that were available to pull. “Volume growth was not that great, but they have improved gross margins by extracting efficiencies from operations, product mix, and the stronger currency. This is a good achievement. Going forward they will face headwinds from a stronger rand, among others. I wonder how many more levers can be pulled. Is there still runway for growth?” Financially Adcock is in a good position, a far cry from five years ago. The improvement in the group’s net average cash position during the year saw finance costs come down from R22.6 million in the prior period to R7.9 million in this financial year. “Adcock has paid debt down to the point that the company is now cash positive. From a financial perspective, the company has a strong balance sheet, which always bodes well when the economy is tough. They can use that strength to ride out the difficult times, or to pick up competitors along the way,” says Reuben Beelders, portfolio manager at Gryphon Asset Management. Management indicated today that acquisitions are on the radar as the group looks to expand the non-regulated portfolio to limit the impact of the exchange rate and the constraints of government’s single exit price. Both Adcock Ingram and its peer Aspen are priced richly, trading off PE (price-earnings) multiples of 19x. “Right now I’m not inclined to own either, but if I had to make a choice I might be inclined to pick Aspen which is more geographically diversified,” says Beelders. Aspen, he adds, is carrying considerable debt. “You could argue that this gives management some levers to pull to improve the business. Adcock has limited debt, but it has culled the low hanging fruit. The best way to find growth now will be via acquisition, which is always risky.” A dividend of 86 cents per share was declared by the board for the year ended June 30, 2018  out of income reserves. The total dividend distribution for the year amounts to 172 cents per share, an increase of 24% over 2017.