Blue Label Telecoms joint CEO Brett Levy is astonished at market jitters around the solvency and turnaround prospects of the company’s telecommunications subsidiary Cell C. Blue Label’s already-hammered shares have faced a renewed sell-off, with R4.6 billion wiped off its market capitalisation over the past two days, bringing its losses so far this year to 49%. “Where exactly is Cell C going wrong? We need time to be proven innocent before we are proven guilty. The punishment does not fit the crime,” says Levy, referring to Blue Label’s investment in Cell C and the plunge in its share price. He was briefing the media yesterday on Blue Label’s results for the year ended May 2018, in which revenue grew by 1% to R26.8 billion and headline earnings per share grew by 1% to 115.42 cents. In the eyes of investors, Blue Label overpaid for Cell C when it shelled out R5.5 billion for a 45% stake in SA’s third largest telecommunication company. The acquisition was completed in August 2017. Others are convinced that Blue Label – which specialises in the distribution of pre-paid products, including airtime and electricity – bought into a business that isn’t living up to expectations. After all, Cell C’s only annual profit was realised in 2017, after struggling to break even since its launch in 2001. Investors are still spooked by Cell C’s interim results released on Tuesday, which show that the firm is running at losses, handset sales have fallen sharply, and its debt load is expected to swell. Although Cell C’s service revenues grew by 11% to R6.9 billion for the six months to June 2018, the growth was stunted by a fall in handset sales and data subscribers. Its losses were trimmed to R645 million from R968 million the previous year. A contentious point is Cell C’s long-term debt. Net debt (excluding leases) grew to R7.3 billion from about R6 billion at the time of the recapitalisation. Before Cell C’s recapitalisation by Blue Label, its debt stood at R18.1 billion. The new debt relates to investments Cell C management began making into business. Defence of Cell C Levy rejects suggestions that the mobile operator is buckling under the weight of its debt. Cell C has scored a new rand-denominated debt facility of R1.4 billion, which will be invested in its network, taking its debt to R8.6 billion. It is also in throes of securing another R1.4 billion through vendor financing and a further R1 billion through what Blue Label calls “shareholder support”. “We don’t have a problem with raising cash,” says Levy. “All of this money is required for Cell C to get into the position of being profitable from a cash flow position.” Other investments will be through Cell C’s JSE listing, which is earmarked for the end of 2019 or early 2020. Levy launched a robust defence of Blue Label’s acquisition of Cell C, saying it has only been eight months (between its acquisition and the company’s 2018 year-end) and that the process of integrating Cell C into the Blue Label stable is ongoing. “We didn’t buy Cell C because we felt that we needed another asset in our network. We bought it because we knew there was a tremendous value we can add to the company.” Blue Label has identified five areas that Cell C will invest in: voice and data; becoming a platform for internet service providers and mobile virtual network operators through its wholesale business; aggressively growing its fibre-to-the-home business; growing its 4G roaming agreement with MTN; and investing in its content platform Black. “We are not chasing subscribers and turnover,” says Levy. “We are chasing turnover that relates to profit. We are not trying to fight with Vodacom or MTN or have a capex war with them.” The investments will pay off in the next two years, he says. “We don’t want to be another Vodacom or MTN. We don’t want to be the number one network either. But we will be a tremendously strong number three network.” Wayne McCurrie, senior portfolio manager at Ashburton Investments, says he is bearish about the telecommunications sector. “I struggle to see how smaller players like Cell C will make money and make a return on capital given the market dynamics of declining revenue in voice and in some instances data, and the massive capex that is required.”