A Chinese crackdown has exposed Tencent’s addiction to video games. Disappointing second-quarter figures have ramped up fears of a slowdown at the web giant, which has seen its market value shrink by $170 billion to around $400 billion this year. Restrictions on new games will further squeeze its bottom line. Results released on Wednesday confirm that growth is sputtering. The company led by Pony Ma generated revenue of 74 billion yuan ($11 billion) in the three months to June. Though this was 30 percent higher than a year earlier, it was below the 77.5 billion yuan average forecast by analysts. Worryingly, revenue from online games, which ring in more than a third of the total, grew at a tepid 6% year-on-year. Net profit was down for the first time in nearly 13 years. Read: Tencent surprises with profit drop as China hobbles games A clampdown on approvals for new games will probably make matters worse. Tencent was forced to pull a blockbuster hit, “Monster Hunter: World” from its site on Monday just days after the game launched in China. The company cited “numerous complaints” regulators had received. Executives confirmed that a restructuring of Beijing’s regulatory bureaucracy is holding up the approval process. The timing is particularly painful for the world’s biggest gaming company. Desktop titles have been in decline as gamers move to smartphones. Meanwhile, mobile hits like “QQ Speed” and “Honour of Kings” are losing momentum. Monthly active users of the latter fell to 222 million in June, from 245 million in February, according to Jefferies. Tencent had been counting on new games like the survival-themed “Fortnite” and “PlayerUnknowns’ Battlegrounds” to revive growth in the People’s Republic. The company is diversifying by building up advertising, video and music streaming. Revenue from other businesses like mobile payments and cloud computing soared 81% in the quarter, and now accounts for almost a quarter of the total. But costs are ballooning, while margins are much lower than in the company’s core gaming operation. Tencent is also ploughing cash to outside bets: the value of new investments hit 32 billion yuan in the six months to June. Tencent has survived from previous run-ins with Beijing, and its WeChat messaging app remains a vital service for Chinese phone users. For all its heft, though, gaming remains essential for Tencent’s bottom line. Context news – Chinese social media and gaming company Tencent on August 15 reported revenue of 73.7 billion yuan ($10.7 billion) in the three months to June, an increase of 30% from the same period last year. Revenue from online games topped 25 billion yuan, up 6% year on year. – Adjusted earnings, excluding share-based compensation and one-off gains, increased 20% to 19.7 billion yuan. – Chinese regulators have frozen approval of game licenses, Bloomberg reported on August 15, citing people familiar with the matter. The freeze follows a reorganisation of the government bodies that oversee gaming and other media sectors earlier in the year. – On August 13, “Monster Hunter: World”, a game developed by Japan’s Capcom and licensed to Tencent, disappeared from the latter’s Chinese-language gaming site, WeGame, just days after its launch. WeGame said in a statement that regulators had received a large number of complaints about the game, which has sold over eight million copies worldwide. – Tencent’s Hong Kong-listed shares closed down 3.6% to HK$336 ahead of the release of its quarterly results on August 15. – Shares in Naspers, the South African group that is Tencent’s largest shareholder, were down 7.5% at R308 319 by 11:00 GMT on August 15.