Here’s what caught our attention on Thursday: 1. Liberty results Insurer, Liberty is reporting a 6% increase in profit for the six months ended June 30, 2018. The company’s normalised headline earning rose 5% to 1 332 cents and normalised headline earnings per share increased 6% to 482.0 cents. Liberty’s basic earnings per share and fully diluted basic earnings per share fell 1% to 536.5 cents and 547.5 cents, respectively. The company is declaring an interim dividend of 276 cents per share. Read: Liberty sees H1 profit rise as turnaround gains traction 2. Developments in the forex inquiry The Competition Commission’s inquiry into traders and commercial banks implicated in a case of the US/rand currencies manipulation, caught some steam on Wednesday. The CompCom argued that the parties’ acceptance to join a covert chatroom was an indication of their intentions to rig the currencies. According to the CompCom, those that joined the ‘smoke-filled darkroom’ knew what they were getting themselves into. Read: The ‘dark and smoke-filled’ chatroom that could sink rogue forex traders 3. Impala Platinum to cut 13 400 jobs Platinum mining group, Impala Platinum announced on Thursday that it would be cutting 13 400 jobs over the next two years. Reuters is reporting that the company is struggling with rising costs and weak platinum prices. 4. Prasa at risk of criminality Despite the Railway Safety Regulator’s (RSR) decision not to renew its safety permit, Passenger Railway Agency of South Africa (Prasa), who works under the RSR, is continuing its operations. This in effect means that Prasa is exposing itself to criminal and illegal activity and can be prosecuted for doing so. The RSR says that the permit expired on July 31 and that it has taken the decision not to issue another permit until it [the RSR] is satisfied with Prasa’s plans to address safety concerns. Moneyweb is reporting that this could have great implications for the two million commuters using trains in South Africa, especially if the services come to a halt. Read: ‘Unsafe’ Prasa defies Railway Safety Regulator 5. Eskom unions to meet with CCMA Eskom came under the spotlight again this week, while some South Africans had no lights at all. Fresh protests erupted at some power stations earlier this week, as workers’ demands for wage increases remain on the table. eNCA is reporting that the Eskom board, as well as unions representing the workers will be meeting with the CCMA to resolve the deadlock in their negotiations.