With the US apparently declaring open war on China (and a few other global trade partners), the spotlight is now firmly on trade relations between these two global superpowers. Much of President Trump’s increased tariffs have focused on steel and other heavy industrial goods, but the US has also targeted a range of high tech industries, particularly where the Chinese have aspirations to become world leaders over the next decade. The US tariff hikes have hinged largely on the concerns from Trump’s administration that China’s trade practices are ‘unfair’ and, in part, threaten the future of the high technology sector in the US. With this backdrop in mind, and looking at the bigger picture, does China truly present a threat to the US’s position of global dominance when it comes to technological advancement and investment? And what exactly does the future look like for China in the tech space? Up until the early years of the Qing Dynasty, China was a global leader in science and technology, when Chinese innovation such as papermaking, printing, the compass, and gunpowder contributed to economic development in Asia and Europe. However, a subsequent decline in technological advancement as China withdrew from global significance meant that more recent history has seen the US significantly overshadow Chinese technological development, with China becoming more renowned over the past few decades for its role as the tech copycat of the world rather than for its esteemed past. China today, however, paints a very different picture when comparing its technological innovation with that of the US. China has arguably now overtaken the US in tech innovation and, in particular, consumer platform-based models, like Tencent and Alibaba, thereby reclaiming its crown as the global leader in technology (if that has not already happened, it will, in my view, do so soon). The question is what is driving this shift? As always, it can be helpful to try to join the dots in a different way. China has a very strong education culture, with school children often studying for 12 hours a day, six days a week. They are tutored extensively. This culture was accentuated by the infamous one-child policy in China, now finally revoked but in place for over 35 years. Parents have one child on whom everything hinges, including their own well-being in retirement (there is still no comprehensive social safety net in China). You therefore have all the ingredients necessary for super-fast technological innovation: According to a major venture capital player who moved from Silicon Valley to Beijing, “Chinese tech entrepreneurs are more competitive, smarter and more ruthless than those in America. They will eat their US competitors for breakfast”. The 20th century saw the rise of America; the 21st will be for China. * Hywel George is director of investments at Old Mutual Investment Group.