“Never cut a tree down in winter time. Never make your most important decisions when you are in your worst mood. Wait, be patient, the storm will pass. The spring will come.” With this quote from former Apple CEO Steve Jobs, Dr Randall Carolissen, group executive for research at the South African Revenue Service (Sars), described to the Nugent Commission how ill-conceived the timing of the review of the revenue authority’s operational model was. “Sars staff would be telling you that the period commencing late 2014 was probably the most traumatic in their professional careers. Once trusting relationships became defined by paranoia and distrust. Engagement with external stakeholders became strained and taxpayers began to show signs of withdrawal as voluntary compliance continued to slip.” The Nugent Commission of Inquiry into tax administration and governance continued its hearings last week, after it was appointed by president Cyril Ramaphosa to get to the root of the problems at Sars. The revenue authority has been mired in controversy amid accusations of inefficiency and allegations that its now suspended commissioner Tom Moyane assisted the state capture project. Although it was clear that many of the Sars employees who testified before the commission were reluctant to show their faces, one could also sense an almost palpable sadness among some as they spoke about the deterioration, fragmentation and general circumstances in which they have had to work over the past three years. Important units were not only disbanded, but staff with decades of experience saw their positions vanish from the organisational chart and got demoted. Some became targets of spurious investigations and had to work with a constant threat of disciplinary proceedings hanging over their heads. Others saw their workload explode and were taken to task for their “underperformance” even though it was the direct result of the new operating model. To add insult to injury, it seems that almost no senior managers within Sars were consulted before the model was introduced. The exodus of skilled staff, and the movement of employees to positions unrelated to their expertise, also dealt a severe blow to Sars’s ability to ensure compliance. Dion Nannoolal, senior manager responsible for high-value audit debt collection, described how a judge instructed him to issue a tax compliance certificate to a non-compliant taxpayer after a poor case was presented in court. “The risk is that I’ve had attorneys that now marketed that judgment saying: ‘Wait a minute, if you are a non-compliant taxpayer, come to me and I will get you a tax clearance certificate’,” he told the commission. Against this background, it is not difficult to understand that staff morale deteriorated. An Ipsos connection survey indicates that between 2016 and 2017 the engagement rate within the enforcement division fell from 66.5 points to 58.7. “I think that is very important,” Fareed Khan, executive responsible for the compliance division within the enforcement unit, told the commission. Khan said he had heard arguments that staff were much happier with the new operating model, but these results contradict such a statement. “There are six criteria that were measured [as part of the survey] and in every single one there was a decline.” In such an environment, it seems almost a small miracle that Sars’s revenue collection efforts didn’t completely derail, something Carolissen confirmed during his testimony: “I’m actually quite surprised that our revenue performance is as high as it was given all of these circumstances.” Sars collects around 90% of government’s revenue, and a deterioration in its efficiency puts the country’s already fragile fiscal position at risk. Which begs the question: why would highly skilled, honest employees continue to work in such an environment? Some staff did leave, but many continue to work at Sars. Carolissen said many employees feel a higher purpose and believe that Sars’s legacy should be protected. It is a national asset. “If we all leave Sars, South Africa will be in deep trouble.” Moreover, the job market is not as welcoming of Sars employees as it used to be. There is a suspicion that staff may have been part of some sinister complot, he added. “We were once a good organisation. The organisation will need people to refocus itself and rebuild itself. There are people that say that we’re going through winter. Spring is around the corner. Things are starting to look up.” But it will be a mammoth task to restore Sars to its former glory. You have to take your hat off to acting commissioner Mark Kingon for taking on the challenge. Unfortunately, suspended commissioner Tom Moyane seems intent on returning to the organisation and it doesn’t look like his disciplinary process will be completed any time soon. In the meantime, efforts are underway to re-establish the large business centre and illicit economy team. The large business unit is responsible for about a third of total revenue. This centre was disbanded as part of the new organisational structure. “Sars has already put together a multi-disciplinary team to work out the details and logistics of these highly focused and disciplined units,” Sars said in a statement on Friday. “Among the team members are experienced officials who worked in the disbanded units and would make valuable contributions to the formation of the new units. The teams have already commenced with their work and it is envisaged that progress reports will be presented to the Sars executive committee by the end of August.” Many of the employees testifying last week suggested that Sars had to revert to its old strategic journey, and the commission, which must deliver its interim findings to Ramaphosa by September 30, will no doubt have something to say about this. With South Africa’s fiscal situation under severe strain, Sars’s problems must be addressed as a matter of urgency. In the meantime, a lot of questions remain unanswered, most important perhaps why a new operating model was implemented even though Sars was doing well. Spring seems a long way off.