For the first six months of the year, the average daily trade value on the JSE was R23.7 billion. For the whole of July, however, there wasn’t a single day when daily trade reached even R20.0 billion. This recent drop in volumes has raised concern among some local market watchers: JSE volume of only R11.6b. July is often poor, but other than mid holidays I cannot recall it being this low for many years. Last period consistently approaching this was during July 2014. — Karin Richards (@Richards_Karin) July 27, 2018  Graph is the JSE avg market turnover since 2008. The current YTD avg is at R21.2bn. Since July this year the avg turnover dropped to only R15bn. Not a healthy scenario. Real market moves usually occur on heavy turnover. #JSE #Trading #Investing #PhoenixInvestmentAnalytics pic.twitter.com/4sLApmoLQZ — Peet Serfontein (@PeetSerfontein) July 24, 2018  Source: JSE There are, however, a number of sides to this story. The long-term trend is up The first is that, if one takes a longer term view, the value traded so far on the JSE this year is above where it was at the same point in 2017. It is slightly down from 2016, but above the two years before that. What this shows is that the long-term trend is still positive. Last year was a quieter year due to pessimism about South Africa’s economic and political outlook, but volume has returned to the market in 2018. “It is slightly lighter than 2016, but you are seeing a turnaround,” says Gary Booysen, portfolio manager at Rand Swiss. “Volume is actually coming back into the market in 2018.” At a high level, this suggests that concerns about volumes may be unfounded. “Our projected total value traded for 2018 is R6.4 trillion, if you just double where we are currently,” Booysen notes. “Unless there is a major upset in the second half of the year, I doubt we are going to see overall trade volumes dropping this year.” Booysen adds that he hasn’t experienced large-sell side traders raising any concerns about volumes or liquidity. In addition, foreigners have also been more active on the JSE than they were last year. So what’s behind the recent dip? Michael Porter, a trader at Unum Capital, says that while he doesn’t have a clear answer for why volumes were weaker in July, there may be a number of contributing factors. The first is a lack of conviction in the market due to company-specific scandals that have hit the JSE. “The biggest one was the once-loved Steinhoff, which has decimated investor confidence, while EOH also comes to mind as well as the ‘research’ report from a certain short seller on one of our banks,” Porter notes. “As a lot of investors and traders got hurt by these issues, we are clearly seeing a lack of confidence from clients taking bigger positions in the market.” The positivity that followed Cyril Ramaphosa’s rise to the presidency has also faded, with investors being more cautious about South African assets again. Policy uncertainty around issues such as the expropriation of land without compensation are weighing on overall confidence. Finally, Porter argues that the overall positioning of portfolios is also playing a role. “Emerging markets have been under-performing against developed markets, and I think the gap is due to close,” he points out. “We’re seeing more and more clients starting to position themselves, which means investors are still sitting with more cash than usual, but they need some high conviction outright plays to implement.” Porter does not expect the lower volumes seen in July to persist, although a turnaround in confidence would be necessary to see trading really pick up. Sorry, but we have to talk about Naspers … Whatever the contributing factors, an analysis of the trade volumes in specific companies does raise an issue that has some people concerned. “The top line hides a lot of detail,” says Bennie van Wyk, a portfolio manager at Sasfin Wealth. “While overall value traded may be up 10% from last year, if you look at the underlying companies, the picture looks a bit different.” He points out that shares in dual-listed companies are not trading in large volumes. The combined market capitalisations of British American Tobacco, AB InBev, BHP Billiton and Richemont is R5.2 trillion, but value traded in those companies on the JSE is just R230 billion, or 4.4% of their market caps. Naspers, on the other hand, is worth R1.2 trillion, and R515 billion has been traded already this year. That is 37% of its market cap. “The concern for us is that if you look at these dual-listed companies, the value traded here on the South African exchange is fairly small,” Van Wyk notes. “The risk is that should Naspers move its primary listing offshore, or even create a secondary listing, we may see a significant reduction in the trade of its shares domestically, because at the moment this is the only market where you can access it.” The larger risk to local investors is if more local companies do the same, which would lower liquidity on the local market. “The structural element of the decline in volumes may be that many of our global multinationals are traded on offshore exchanges,” Van Wyk says. “I think that may continue, because many companies are migrating offshore, and I can only assume that this trend to globalise will continue to play out.”