Many first world economies have begun introducing protectionist measures, and this is likely to impact African economies, delegates heard at a recent Deloitte Global Trade and Indirect Tax conference. In order to grow, Africa may benefit more by driving intra-regional trade, with the signing of the Africa Continental Free Trade area – an example of this new attitude to economic co-operation. While tax policy has a role to play in increasing trade, including in South Africa, speakers indicated other policy considerations are also material. The region’s historically low tax to GDP ratios limit the economic options on the table. According to Logan Wort (Executive Secretary of the African Tax Administration Forum), who delivered the keynote address, Africa’s tax to GDP ratio has recently improved from 15.6% in 2010 to 18.3% in 2017 – although this is still below the average of 21% for OECD countries. To some extent this reflects the lower income per capita ratio many African economies have compared to other regions. However, this may not represent the full picture as Africa loses more money through illicit financial flows than it receives in aid. Wort believes it’s imperative for African revenue authorities to work together to ensure that world tax rules take account of the continent’s needs and inappropriate standards are not imposed, as well as to coordinate tax policies that encourage intra-regional trade. Duncan Pieterse from National Treasury discussed trade issues in more detail, noting that trade and openness is good for inclusivity, and disproportionately benefits lower-income households as their expenditure is skewed towards tradable goods. In an open economy, the price of these goods is much lower. Trade agreements, he said, are important for this openness. Their effectiveness can be mitigated though, by the use of certain product standards by higher income countries, who may require, for instance, a pest risk disease assessment before agricultural goods are allowed into their markets. African countries therefore need to invest in their own systems so that they are able to respond appropriately. Indirect taxes such as customs and excise have an important role to play in encouraging trade linkages. Countries who choose to open up their markets forgo a significant amount of their revenue base by dropping excise duties, and will need to make up this revenue in other ways. Frequently, this means they need to diversify their revenue base and to bring informal sectors into the fold. As tax professionals, we have seen a shift worldwide to increasing indirect tax, including excise duties and VAT, rather than direct tax such as personal income tax or company tax. New taxes – such as those on sugar, oil and carbon tax – have also been introduced in many countries. Often, the object of these taxes is not only to raise revenue, but also to encourage social shifts. For instance, some Middle Eastern countries are looking at a tax on plastic packaging to encourage sustainability. Other changes in taxation policy are driven by a changing economy. E-commerce, for instance, has been largely ignored by policy makers until recently. Now, with some of the world’s most valuable companies selling  digital goods and services on-line, this is likely to intensify in the future. This means digital services are becoming a key issue for tax authorities. For example, in South Africa, foreign suppliers of on-line digital products are required to charge VAT on their supplies here, thus shoring up a potential loss of VAT revenue.  Another example is Uganda which has recently initiated a tax on social media use, despite a consumer backlash. On the taxpayer side, multinationals also need to prepare for a much greater level of transparency regarding details of the group including income, assets, headcount, etc., due to country by country reporting and exchange of information agreements. Whilst there is a shift towards increasing indirect taxes, increases in VAT and other sales taxes hit poorer households especially hard. Governments need to weigh up affordability considerations against their need for increased revenue, and this can be a difficult balancing act indeed. Delia Ndlovu is Managing Director – Deloitte Africa Tax & Legal. Severus Smuts is Director: Indirect Tax at Deloitte South Africa.