The long-awaited state capture inquiry kicked off on Monday in Johannesburg, with the inquiry hearing about inefficiencies created by the government and various state organs as it attempts to do its work. Deputy Chief Justice Raymond Zondo, who is chairing the inquiry, said some government departments and state organs, among them National Treasury and the State Security Agency (SSA), have been uncooperative in assisting the inquiry. An impasse has emerged between SSA and the inquiry over the necessary top security clearance for some of the commission’s investigators, legal team and other employees. This matter, said Zondo, has not been sorted despite the inquiry’s start on Monday. “As of Thursday [August 16], there has not been much that security agencies have done in expediting the process of providing security clearance,” said Zondo. He has asked President Cyril Ramaphosa to intervene in the processing of security clearance and finance minister Nhlanhla Nene to intervene in his request for the National Treasury to assist the inquiry. Zondo does not believe that the delays are a deliberate attempt to sabotage the inquiry’s work and progress.  “The inquiry depends on the cooperation of government departments. [Not cooperating with the inquiry] doesn’t help the inquiry or the country in finding solutions and dealing with corruption and state capture.” Witnesses The commission was established by former President Jacob Zuma in January 2018. It has a mandate of looking at corruption and fraud at various state organs in which high-profile politicians, including Zuma, have been directly or indirectly implicated, as highlighted by former public protector Thuli Madonsela in the State of Capture report. The inquiry is guided by the report, which was released in 2016, as one of its remedial action was for the inquiry to be instituted. Advocate Paul Pretorius, who is leading the evidence for the inquiry, said the first issue to be dealt with by the inquiry is ministerial appointments and dismissals at various organs of state, with several key witnesses expected to testify. Among the witnesses are former deputy finance minister Mcebisi Jonas and former ANC MP Vytjie Mentor. Both have said they were offered key ministerial positions by members of the Gupta family.  Arguably Jonas’s case was the most audacious. In late February 2016, Jonas issued a statement claiming that the Gupta family had met with him and had offered him the position of finance minister – prior to finance minister Nhlanhla Nene, being fired. One of the Gupta brothers, Ajay, also allegedly offered to pay Jonas R600 million if he agreed to follow orders relating to the procurement of an R1 trillion nuclear deal. The Guptas have rejected all allegations of wrongdoing. Zuma and Ajay Gupta On Monday, lawyers for the Guptas and Zuma made submissions to Zondo regarding cross-examining witnesses, including those implicating them in state capture, and the opportunity to submit evidence. Advocate Mike Hellens, acting for Ajay Gupta, said he has been notified that his client is implicated in the evidence of Mentor and former Business Leadership South Africa director of communications Themba Maseko. Hellens said the inquiry didn’t give Ajay Gupta “reasonable time” to prepare responses to potential evidence that might implicate him. Advocate Muzi Sikhakhane, acting for Zuma, said his client has also been implicated by the evidence of Maseko, Mentor and government communications deputy director-general Phumla Williams. Sikhakhane that Zuma needs time to decide how he responds to the evidence against him – whether he would submit a statement addressing various allegations against him. Hellens and Sikhakhane said the intention of their clients is not to delay the inquiry. Zondo approved the request of both lawyers but they have to make a separate application to cross-examine witnesses. The duration of the inquiry would be guided by the evidence submitted. The North Gauteng High Court in Pretoria recently granted Zondo’s request for an order to extend the inquiry for a further two years. The inquiry will also hear submissions from National Treasury official Ndleleni Willie Mathebula, Maseko, and Williams. The inquiry continues on Tuesday with submissions by Mathebula.