South African Revenue Service (Sars) officials have told the Nugent Commission of Inquiry how the entity’s enforcement capability became fragmented after a new operating model was introduced. Although enforcement units are generally not a big money generator for Sars, they are vital to ensure compliance and to reduce reputational risk. These units deal with wide ranging cases, which include high net worth individuals who use special purpose vehicles to hide money, the manipulation of customs, Ponzi schemes and the illicit economy – which includes tobacco, liquor and textiles. Evidence leader advocate Carol Steinberg told the commission that witnesses were concerned about showing their faces (some had legal representation), but said the testimony presented was corroborated by several parties and was not the result of an individual whim or grudge. Pieter Engelbrecht, who headed up the centralised projects division within the enforcements unit between 2012 and 2016 and who became a senior specialist within the legal counsel division since the introduction of the new operating model, said the current enforcement effort did not have the capability to deal with complex investigations. Engelbrecht said it was impossible to audit or investigate one individual who was linked to 30 or 40 entities with different income streams and asset bases in an isolated manner (looking at one entity or tax type at a time), as Sars would never get the complete picture. He said previously an investigation or audit would recreate the complete financial position of the taxpayer or group as it was the only way to determine taxability. Engelbrecht said there have been discussions within Sars about reverting to the old enforcement methodology. These discussions commenced in May 2018. Certain proposals for the establishment of an illicit economy division have been submitted to the executive committee of Sars. “My understanding is that it has been well received and that there is support for this type of initiative.” The fragmentation of the enforcement divisions has also resulted in delays. One affidavit read at the hearing, referred to the fact that it took eight months to get approval for a sequestration due to fragmentation in the debt management division, putting Sars in a “row boat”, while the taxpayer was in a “speed boat”. Dion Nannoolal, senior manager responsible for high value audit debt collection, said in the past they required between four to six signatures to authorise a preservation order on a group of companies. They currently need between eight and 12 signatures. “I can assure you we have lost possibility hundreds of millions of rands in the last few years because of these inefficiencies.” Nannoolal stressed that the right leadership was vital, even if Sars used a siloed approach. “You need to have the right leadership. Leadership that is strategically capable to run the organisation and leadership that is supportive and when we deal with matters of this nature and the projects that we are busy with, if these two things don’t work, then it has a huge impact on compliance in South Africa.” Keith Hendrickse, former senior manager for the National Projects Office in the Western Cape, told the committee how the office was left off the Sars organogram without consultation when the new operating model was adopted. For about four to five months after this happened, Hendrickse didn’t have a job title but continued to go to work. He became a senior specialist for criminal case selection after he requested a new job description. He continues to work in this position. Hendrickse said Sars was previously asked to explain what happened to this capability and said that it was still within the organisation. He believes this response was misleading. “The people were in Sars, but the capability was no longer there.” Another affidavit from an official in the High Court Litigation Unit explained how they previously relied on other units within Sars to do many of their cases, which meant that they would get cases generated by enforcement or the large business centre, but for the last couple of years no cases have been generated after capacity was shut down. President Cyril Ramaphosa appointed the Nugent commission in May as part of an effort to stabilise Sars, restore its credibility and strengthen its capacity to meet revenue targets. The commission resumed its public hearings on Tuesday.