In 2010 the Industrial Development Corporation (IDC) was a self-financing national development finance institution whose primary objectives were to contribute to sustainable economic growth and the economic empowerment of all citizens. Eight years later, and the IDC’s mandate has expanded to “provide funding for the development of industry in South Africa and the rest of Africa”. The IDC also has its eye on the $100 billion investment target optimistically expected to be pumped into South Africa over the next five years, and Ebrahim Patel, minister of economic development, is of the view that the IDC “will need to play a critical role in sourcing and co-funding a significant part of this investment in line with its role to develop the nation’s industrial capacity”. Chairperson of the board Busisiwe Mabuza provides assurance that the IDC remains committed to inclusive and transformative development. In carrying out its mandate, R23 billion has been committed to funding black industrialists over the five-year period to March 2020, and 67% has already been approved. Over a three-year period to March 2018, R6.5 billion has been approved for female entrepreneurs, and R4.4 billion for youth-empowered businesses. The total funding approved in 2018 amounted to R16.7 billion, an increase of 9% on 2017, and disbursements came to R15.4 billion. Paying out these large amounts has resulted in an escalation of financial liabilities to R33 billion (2017: R30 billion), of which R8.6 billion consists of foreign loans. Cash and cash equivalents are R6 billion (2017: R7.6 billion), but this buffer is slowly dissipating. Loans worth R9 billion are payable within a year, and R15 billion within five years. Audit report The auditors identified the following key audit matters: IFRS 9 (financial instruments) only became effective on January 1, and the auditors no doubt vigorously tested the fair value of investments. But in my view, based on the increasing impairments and diminishing returns, these will be presenting problems in the future. National Empowerment Fund (NEF) There is still uncertainty as to whether the NEF will be absorbed into the IDC. In keeping with its low level of public transparency, the IDC failed to provide an update in its 2018 integrated report, even though taking on the NEF would have serious financial implications. The NEF is in need of extra funds, and on June 27 Business Day reported that the NEF was in the process of requesting approval for a R500 million loan from the IDC. Diminishing profits At first blush the 2018 annual report presents a picture of a financially stable group. But a more in-depth examination of the financial statements provides an indication that the profitability of the group has been slowly decreasing over the years, particularly when capital gains are excluded. Capital gains can also be a sign that good investments are being sold to finance the IDC’s growing financial commitments. Declining cash flow Nevertheless, the unabated granting of capital is in my view placing a strain on cash flow, and is slowly eroding the cash surplus. It should also be noted that the cash status has been propped up by the sale of investments. Investments The IDC’s investments include listed equities, unlisted equities, preference shares, and loans and advancements. There is no differentiation between investments to protect capital and provide a return, and investments which consist of the granting of capital to entrepreneurs. There is no transparency in the loans and advances, and no mention was made of the loan that has been well covered in the press, namely the loan to Oakbay. This is all that Patel had to say in the online version of the 2018 Integrated Report: “During 2017, the IDC was in the news for its loan to Oakbay …” and the remainder of the sentence disappeared. One would assume that the Oakbay loan is included in the impairments above, but one does question whether there are other skeletons waiting to emerge. Financial liabilities Due to its increasing funding commitments, the IDC is becoming more reliant on loans from external parties. Servicing the finance charges on these loans is negatively impacting the cash flow. Loans worth R9 billion will become due and payable within the year (R2.3 billion of foreign loans and R6.8 billion of domestic loans). The IDC will have to come up with the funds, and it will be very unfortunate if good investments have to be sold to finance these commitments. The financial goliath that the IDC once was is showing weakness. The time has come to take stock and rebuild what it has lost.