Few of those who are looking for jobs can find one in an economy with an unemployment rate of 27.2%. In reality, the picture is much more bleak because the official unemployment rate tends to understate the weakness of job prospects. How so? This is due to the missing workers – prospective workers who, because of the prolonged scarcity of job opportunities, are neither employed nor looking for a job. There’s no arguing that we have the lowest labour participation rate since the advent of democracy, and we count the informal economy as being helpful because we know those who are outside the labour force are eking out a living from it. In South Africa we have 15.5 million people who are not economically active, but there’s an even more worrying pool of people within that number. The clear and present danger – the ticking time bomb – of the youth, who, for most of their lives, have been ignored by the private sector and government. According to the Statistics SA Quarterly Labour Force Survey for the second quarter of 2018, South Africa has 10.3 million people aged between 15 and 24 who are not in employment, education or training. A rising tide of youth who are literally doing nothing with their lives, not because they don’t want to, but because of the way our economy is set up. It’s as if the economy, its policies, and the country’s leaders are conspiring against these young people. Oh, wait – some may argue that they are. Alarmingly, these young people make up most of the unemployed 27.2%. If ever there was a reason to panic or worry, this is it. Yet these numbers don’t even come close to the lived realities of those who are unemployed and have long given up looking for work. The point I’m making here is that in a complex economy, conventional measures don’t always show the full picture. If we are to use Stats SA’s expanded unemployment rate, which sits at 37.2%, then perhaps we will begin to appreciate the extent of the crisis. It has prompted me to ask how long the South African economy can survive this crisis of rising unemployment and poverty. Can government and the private sector afford to think that it can go on without consequences? I think not. It is in both their interests for the economy to start improving and eventually growing. We know a positive GDP won’t automatically reduce unemployment and poverty. For South Africa, it will take economic growth in addition to rising productivity and fair distribution of income. Low labour participation, high youth unemployment and an informal employment sector that barely improves the lives of those participating in it – these are not just wrinkles in the economy; they are crevices that appear to be widening and can’t simply be patched. In the 10 years since the 2008 global financial crisis – with its impact on our economy and companies – hundreds of thousands of South Africans have left the labour force. And we cannot ignore the effects of globalisation and its bearing on the labour market in emerging markets. It’s worth repeating, even though I have done so in many columns, that job creation should be fundamental to the private sector, even more so than the state, because the former can play an enabling role in creating an attractive environment. Now that former President Jacob Zuma’s administration is no longer the stumbling block it was claimed to be, what is holding the private sector back? After all, President Cyril Ramaphosa’s ‘new dawn’ investment drive has thus far raised more than $10 billion. On the one hand, local business would do well to put their money into this investment drive, lest we begin to think the problem has always been the private sector’s own reluctance to join government in doing the hard work. The perception is that the private sector is deliberately withholding the cash reserves government wants to use to kick-start the economy by rebuilding the foundations through local investment. On the other hand, government must make an effort to understand the broader forces and activities that have been triggering a shift in employment landscape – including the slide from formal to precarious employment, and the growing proportion of formerly employed workers who have become ‘missing workers’ (and are not employed, have given up looking for work, and are not economically active). Juan Somavía, former director-general of the International Labour Organisation, once said: “We know only too well that it is precisely the world of work that holds the key for solid, progressive, and long-lasting eradication of poverty. Poverty elimination is impossible unless the economy generates opportunities for investment, job creation, and sustainable livelihoods.” Economic growth is not a panacea, but it’s a start. Here’s bitter pill to swallow – for it to happen, the private sector must do the hard work, the turning of the soil through local investment. It must be them and not an outsider who makes the first move and does the hard work. How long can the extraordinary levels of poverty, unemployment, and income and wealth inequality go on? Can the South African economy thrive alongside these conditions? No, it can’t. It’s time to fix them, not for altruistic reasons, but to avert the social instability that such conditions will trigger. Increased local investment is the key. It could lead to more money in the hands of ordinary South Africans, if there’s equitable distribution. And maybe, just maybe, this might stimulate economic growth, expand the tax base and eventually lead to jobs that will lessen unemployment and poverty.