Poor maintenance of South Africa’s roads and infrastructure coupled with high crime rates are keeping short-term insurers from reducing premiums, says Santam. According to the short-term insurer, increased competition from new entrants in the market is unlikely to drive down costs significantly. “Competition is good for the consumer and therefore, we welcome any competition in the market. But we must understand that the South African insurance market is already extremely competitive so I’m not sure that more players will enhance the competitiveness – [there are] very strong competitors and enough that there isn’t a problem with competition. I think that if you really want to reduce premiums, you will have to work on reducing the risk – our roads and our infrastructure must be maintained better and crime must decrease, those factors have a very big impact on premiums,” said chief executive Lizé Lambrechts. Amid challenging economic conditions, the insurer found that consumers are struggling to meet payment obligations with some even reducing their level cover so as to avoid an increase in premiums. Financially burdened consumers are leading to a deterioration in persistency – which is a measure of the amount of business that an insurance company is able to retain during a given period without policies being lapsed – in some parts of the market as well as some difficulty in growing premiums. In spite of the weak trading environment, the country’s largest general insurer reported a 13% increase in gross written premiums to R15.59 billion for the six months to June 30, 2018. It registered gross written premium growth of 9% in its conventional insurance book and a significant increase in its underwriting margin. “These were strong results, with Santam improving the underwriting margin to 8.4%, marginally above its target range and double that achieved in the first half of 2017.  One of the reasons for this has been a fairly benign claims period relative to other years.  The property class, in particular, swung from an underwriting loss of R415m to a profit of R280m,” said Rahima Cassim, a fund manager at Ashburton Investments. The benign catastrophe claims environment follows a severe storm and devastating fires in Cape Town and parts of the Southern Cape including Knysna, for which it incurred R823 million in gross claims in the first half of 2017. In the same period, severe storms in Gauteng and KwaZulu-Natal saw the group’s conventional insurance business register gross claims of around R1.1 billion. A high incidence of commercial fires completed the triple whammy and weighed on its property book. An improved in its underwriting result was also driven actions implemented in the second of half of 2017, whereby it worked alongside brokers at commercial properties to either asses risk and improve management or increase premiums in line with increased risk or in some cases turn down risks it considered uninsurable, Lambrechts said. The improved underwriting result sent headline earnings per share skyrocketing 72% to R10.18. Santam lifted its interim dividend by 8% to R3.63 and delivered a return on shareholders funds of 30.3%. “Not a lot of business can deliver that kind of return in this environment. Investors are prepared to pay a premium to Net Asset Value and 4.3x book value for Santam because of its highly attractive return on capital and its high level of historical returns,” said Adrian Cloete, a portfolio manager at PSG Wealth. He did caution that the high returns are subject to volatility based on its underwriting result insurance return on capital and investment return on capital. During the interim period, Santam paid out R9 billion in claims, of which R100 million is related to Listeriosis. Lambrechts said it has provided for a potential increase in listeriosis claims and well as a potential class action suit up to a certain point, after which its reinsurer would take over. The group foresees limited opportunities for growth in the low-growth South African economy. Lambrechts said it is difficult to weigh in on the potential impact of the land debate as it is evolving. If farmers lose confidence and plant less, Santam’s crop business would be affected. She said it is too early to say whether farmer’s is waning as it insurers summer crops, which are to be planted in the coming weeks. Santam Agriculture is the country’s leading crop insurer, it insures crops only once planted and on a short-term basis. It continues to drive its geographical diversification strategy and foresees faster growth in the Rest of Africa, India and Malaysia – where it owns stakes in Saham Finances Group, Shriram General Insurance and Pacific & Orient Insurance.