Here’s what caught our attention on Friday: 1. EFF introduces bill to nationalise Sarb The Economic Freedom Fighters, led by Julius Malema, tabled an amendment bill to nationalise the South African Reserve Bank on Thursday. Bloomberg is reporting that Malema says the directors of the Sarb should be appointed by the country’s finance minister, not shareholders. The ANC voted against the nationalisation of the Sarb during the ANC conference last year, while the Sarb governor says the institution should be kept independent to retain control over South Africa’s monetary policy. 2. Resilient Reit to release financial results Resilient Real Estate Investment Trust is expected to release its half-year results on Friday. The company came under fire earlier this year after it faced allegations of being involved in shady dealings which vaulted it into a process of restating its financials from 2017. Read: The great Resilent reversal 3. Unions accept Eskom wage offer Is Eskom back on track? Unions representing workers, namely the National Union of Mineworkers (Num), the National Union of Metalworkers South Africa (Numsa) and Solidarity have accepted cash-strapped Eskom’s wage offer of 7% for 2018 and 7.5% for the next two years. Num and Numsa says they accepts Eskom’s offer on condition that the utility does not discipline workers who participated in illegal strikes some weeks ago, Eskom rejected this condition. Read related: How do Eskom unions sleep at night 4. Standard Bank ramps up client and digital focus Standard Bank announced during its half-year results presentation on Thursday, its plan to ramp up focus on its clients, digitisation and integration as competition in the banking industry intensifies. The CEO says mobile transactions are increasing and wants to further incorporate digitisation into the space. Read: Standard Bank step up client and digital focus in competitive market 5. Sassa beneficiaries bothered with unlawful deductions It’s still a vile battle between Sassa, its beneficiaries and Net1. Sassa beneficiaries have been coming forward to contest unlawful deductions from their accounts. Moneyweb is reporting that Net1 UEPS, its financial subsidiaries CPS, Smart Life Insurance and EasyPay and its banking partner Grindrod Bank are being held responsible for the unlawful deductions. The beneficiaries are seeking an order from the court to protect them against the deductions. Sassa is currently phasing out its services from Net1 and phasing in services from the Post Office for distributions as the Net1 contract concludes.