In the last 10 years, cider, wine, and spirits producer Distell paid R7 billion rand in excise duties to government, almost 10 times more than the R900 million it paid to shareholders in the form of dividends. Sharply rising excise duties are one of the headwinds faced by the group. Excise duties accounted for 26.4% of the R24.2 billion of revenue generated by Distell in its financial year to June 30; up from 20.2% in 2013. Put differently, revenue grew by 10.4%, but only by 7.7% when one excludes the excise duties. Other headwinds faced in the period included weak consumer consumption, volatile exchange rates and intense competition from multinationals like Diageo, Heineken, Pernod Ricard and AB InBev. Volumes during the 12 months grew by 4.4% across its three operating regions – South Africa, Africa, and international. In South Africa volumes were up by 4.4% and revenue by 9%, driven by strong performance from Savanna and Bernini (up 23% and 43%), supported by growth in gin and vodka and to a lesser extent the wine businesses. In Africa, business volumes and revenue were up 7% and 19% respectively with considerable emphasis being placed on the Angolan and Kenyan businesses. Internationally the picture was mixed with positive performances in Europe, the travel retail business, Latin America and the Asia-Pacific region helping to ensure volume growth was at least positive at 0.4% and revenue up 2.6%. To achieve group-wide volume growth without sacrificing the top line and market share required delicate balancing. The trade-off was a drop in operating margin, which slid from 10.6% in the previous year to 9.85%. “To get volume growth we could not be aggressive about price increases,” CEO Richard Rushton told analysts and media at the presentation of the group’s results on Friday. However, subsequent to year-end, prices have been increased. “We have been quite aggressive and are a little nervous,” he admitted. “But we back ourselves to support these higher increases. The wildcard is the trade-down effect. How will this play out in a tough environment?” With costs growing faster than revenue and margins sliding, the consequence was that headline earnings per share fell 5.6%. Once adjusted for once-off losses and restructuring costs, headline earnings grew by 2.2% to R1.5 billion. However, the market was dismayed by the margin compression and the share price fell to R120/share before recovering slightly on Friday. “The problem is that government is milking this company dry,” says Chris Logan of Opportune Investments. “What are they getting in return? Very little, I’d say. What government could do is facilitate wine exports to China. This is where the action is. Companies like Treasury Wine Estates TWE (ASX) have gone from AU$4 to AU$19 partly because the Australian government facilitated duty-free access to the Chinese market. Chilean and New Zealand producers have the same access. We will struggle to compete without this. “That said, Richard is doing a good job of making Distell a better company,” he adds. “You don’t see it yet because conditions are difficult, because changing the culture of this company will take time, and so the share price has not responded.” A closer look at the results suggests that the restructuring and focused marketing efforts of the last four years are beginning to deliver results, particularly when it comes to productivity, which is benchmarked. Efforts to consolidate Distell’s fragmented production and distribution operations are helping to control costs. At its Springs cidery (one of the biggest cider production plants in the world today), where the company now ferments, processes and packages on one site, unit costs increased by 2.7% in the year – well below inflation. As a result of these and other efforts, litres sold per employee and revenue per employee increased faster in the last year than in the previous four years, contributing to 5.7% and 10.4% compound annual growth respectively. On the marketing front, the company has improved its customer reach and calls on 44 000 customers directly, up from 14 000 four years ago. In Africa Distell’s plan to create strong routes to market platforms in select markets is taking shape. Key to this strategy is Angolan company Best Global Brands (BGB), in which it owns 26%. The intention is to acquire the balance of the company, probably towards the end of 2019. “We bought 26% to get to know the business and understand the environment. We are very positive about this company and its potential for growth in Angola and elsewhere,” says Rushton. While BGB currently trades on a 3% Ebit margin (ratio of earnings before interest and taxes to net revenue), he estimates that it could reach 20% given the correct attention. Distell is financially solid. It is highly cash generative, with net cash generated from operating activities rising 21.6% to R2.3 billion. Debt remains manageable with a debt-to-equity ratio of 29%, down from 33.8% last year. The total dividend for the year rose by 4.2% to 395c. The Springs Cidery Image: Moneyweb Image: Moneyweb Image: Moneyweb Image: Moneyweb Image: Moneyweb Image: Moneyweb Image: Moneyweb Image: Moneyweb Image: Moneyweb Image: Moneyweb Image: Moneyweb