Lawyers for Ajay Gupta plan to submit a formal application to cross-examine former deputy finance minister Mcebisi Jonas after his damning testimony at the state capture commission of inquiry, which implicated the controversial Gupta family in wide-scale corruption. Deputy chief justice Raymond Zondo – who chairs the commission – said on Tuesday that lawyers for Ajay Gupta indicated to the commission that they plan to submit an application on Friday to cross-examine Jonas and former ANC MP Vytjie Mentor. If Zondo agrees to Ajay’s application to cross-examine witnesses, he too may be required to take the stand at the commission. Read: The R6bn the Guptas gained from SA’s fiscus Jonas and Mentor have both claimed that they were offered high-level cabinet positions by Ajay at the infamous Gupta family compound in Saxonwold, Johannesburg. Jonas was allegedly offered a R600 million bribe by Ajay to become finance minister in October 2015, replacing Nhlanhla Nene, after former president Jacob Zuma’s son, Duduzane, facilitated a meeting between Jonas and Ajay. Meanwhile, Mentor was offered the public enterprises minister post in September 2010 – just before Barbara Hogan was ousted – allegedly by Ajay. Jonas and Mentor have said Zuma had knowledge that they were offered cabinet positions by Ajay, and was equally complicit with the Gupta family. The Gupta’s master plan was to appoint ministers of their choice to help the family secure contracts in government’s R1 trillion planned nuclear programme. Read: The Gupta’s attempt to hijack SA’s R1trn nuke programme The Gupta family have denied all allegations of wrongdoing. Zondo said Zuma and Duduzane have told the commission that they have yet to decide on whether they will make formal applications to cross-examine Jonas and Mentor. Lawyers for Zuma and the Gupta family had an urgent meeting with Zondo before the start of the commission hearings on Tuesday to discuss the prospects of cross-examining witnesses. Controversial arms deal advisor Fana Hlongwane, who is alleged to have also facilitated a meeting between Jonas and Ajay at the Gupta compound, has also applied to cross-examine Jonas. Zondo is yet to make a ruling on whether the commission’s rules allow individuals implicated in state capture to cross-examine witnesses and whether they should also appear before the commission. Advocate Vincent Maleka, who acts for the commission, is pushing for implicated individuals to also be cross-examined and take the stand. “The privilege to cross-examine comes with responsibility and they should also be cross-examined to test their version of events,” Maleka argued. The only formal application that the commission has received to cross-examine Jonas is by Hawks major general Zinhle Mnonopi. She wants to cross-examine Jonas about his bombshell revelation at the commission on Friday that the Hawks deliberately attempted to sabotage and quash an investigation into Ajay’s R600 million bribe to Jonas. Jonas testified that Mnonopi asked him in front of his lawyer to sign a prepared statement — which would have closed the investigation —when he reported the bribe to law enforcement officials. The statement allegedly stated that Jonas was not willing to submit a statement and that he not a witness to any wrongdoing. Zondo has not made a decision to allow Mnonopi the opportunity to cross-examine Jonas as she is yet to submit supplementary affidavits that would further elaborate her version of events to refute Jonas’s claims. Lawyers for Mnonopi have agreed to submit supplementary affidavits by Friday. Another implicated individual that wants to cross-examine Mentor is Lakela Kaunda, Zuma’s then chief of staff and advisor. Kaunda allegedly helped Ajay Gupta to secure a meeting with Mentor where she would be offered a cabinet position.