I’ve just returned from a five-state visit to the US on a programme that emphasised international economic cooperation in the context of the growth and integration of emerging markets into the world economy. It included reviewing US efforts to strengthen its economy by stimulating growth and employment, reforming financial institutions, and the way in which some cities are diversifying from being driven by a single sector since the 2009 financial crisis. This had me contemplating South Africa’s current situation. The month spent engaging on economic policies from a federal, state and city level has led me to believe that there are a few big and important lessons South Africa could benefit from. I often ask those leading our government’s policy development if the politicians they’re advising pay attention, and the answer is almost always a chuckle. Today, writing about lessons SA could pick up from the US can be seen as irrelevant – more so in the face of the recent 10th Brics summit and its continuing meetings in August. There is no arguing that China will in the foreseeable future become the world’s biggest economy. As such, our close relations to it through Brics may yield some favourable crops for South Africa. Having said that, it would be irresponsible of us to not learn from what I observed about the US public policies towards rebuilding the economy after the financial crisis in states such as Michigan and Nevada. While doing so, we must be mindful that lessons from history and other countries are not perfect and often are characterised by dreadful features that should rather be erased or ignored even by their own governments. The main lesson the South African government should be learning can be found in the contrast between Detroit and Las Vegas. The decline of Detroit in Michigan illustrates how dependance on a single sector in a period of rapid globalisation will produce long-term economic weakness in the form of collapse and job losses. In the face of a weakening economy and advancing technology, one simply cannot afford to have all one’s eggs in one basket. Only Ford and General Motors are left in Detroit – and the latter, like many manufacturers, has adopted automation, resulting in fewer human workers in its plants. As jobs disappeared in the automobile industry and that city’s economy ground to a halt, people left Detroit. Its population went from over 1.2 million to 690 000 in less than three years. Today, one can still see the effects of that exodus in the form of a half-empty business district. There are abandoned and derelict buildings all over downtown Detroit. The worst was still to come. In 2013 the city filed for bankruptcy, becoming the largest US city in recent history to do so – poor political decisions and corruption of officials being the main catalysts. The economic and political crises have resulted in persistently high unemployment, rising crime and a weak education system. Yes, the similarities with what’s happening here at home are jarring – our ghost towns and buildings in downtown in Johannesburg come to mind, as does our unemployment crisis. Despite efforts to revive Detroit, including using tax cuts and other incentives to lure companies back into the city, business has remained cautious,  unconvinced by public policy and unable to see any reason why it should invest in the city again. The lesson is that it takes both business and government to make an economy work in good as well as bad times. To government, the lesson is that without clear business-friendly policy, there will be no real incentive to create jobs and possibly raise wages, which could lead to increased spending and bring in new investment. In Las Vegas, by contrast, after experiencing the impact of the 2009 crisis, government responded by immediately coming up with strategies to diversify its economy, moving away from its dependency on gambling, tourism and hospitality to attracting and courting tech start-ups and already established tech companies, as well as logistics and other innovation-driven companies. They’re currently enjoying great success as a result of that proactive drive; some of Silicon Valley-based companies have built their data storage facilities and other operations there. Drone manufacturing companies, both national and international, have facilities there. And other research, development and innovation companies have followed suit. However, their success could also be their undoing since they’re beginning to experience a labour shortage including in key services such as education and health. The American lesson for South Africa should be obvious by now: despite the shenanigans in Washington at federal level, states and cities are not waiting for consensus or delaying work. It’s reasonable to say that Las Vegas public policy enabled the city to adapt to external changes and transform its long-term economic prospects positively. That is a lesson for South Africa. It is in these two examples that we see the visionary teachings of Frederic Bastiat, the French economist of the 1800s, about the effects that can be seen and the effects that must be foreseen. The opportunity costs of ignoring the lessons from the US will have long-term effects.