Following revelations about extensive share dealings in and among the wider Resilient stable group of companies last month, which flowed from a leaked report by 36ONE Asset management and Arqaam Capital, an investigation by Moneyweb has revealed how a one-time groundsman at Kyalami Schools came to own over R1 billion-worth of stock in Greenbay and Resilient through four nondescript companies. Analysis of the shareholder register for Greenbay Properties (one of the companies in the Resilient stable) from September 2017 to January 2018 revealed four companies that owned significant amounts of stock in Greenbay. These companies shared similarly nondescript names that all began with the letter “K” and followed by the first ten digits of each company’s registration number, indicating that all four were registered in the year 2012 – the so-called “K2012” companies. Upon closer investigation, all four companies listed one Hendrik Oberholzer as the sole director who had, on an aggregate basis, been an aggressive buyer of both Resilient and Greenbay shares, as can be seen below: When Moneyweb inquired with Oberholzer as to why he had been investing in these companies, he did not engage, saying: “As a policy I only discuss investment strategies with my advisors and clients”. This would be perfectly acceptable under ordinary circumstances. Except these circumstances appear far from ordinary. Mr Oberholzer was once employed as a groundsman at Kyalami Schools, a collection of primary and secondary schools that includes Beaulieu Preparatory School, Kyalami Preparatory School and Beaulieu College. In an effort to corroborate this fact, Moneyweb contacted the principal of Kyalami Preparatory, a Mr Hala, who is still new to the school, who said he had no recollection of Oberholzer being employed there. However while he could not confirm Oberholzer’s employment, the receptionist recalled one Hendrik Oberholzer as previously being employed there. Coincidentally, Moneyweb understands that Resilient CEO Des de Beer is extensively involved with KPS through his philanthropy. When Moneyweb pressed Oberholzer for the identities of the shareholders of the companies he represented, he provided  shareholder registers for all four companies. These confirm that since December 2 2014, he has been and is currently the sole shareholder of all four companies. On paper, the one-time groundsman of Beaulieu College is now a billionaire. Moneyweb approached Greenbay and Resilient to see if they knew Oberholzer or any of the beneficial owners of the K companies. This was the response from Greenbay: “The management and board of Greenbay have no relationship or association with the directors or shareholders of the K2012 companies you have enquired about. We have not been contacted by Mr Oberholzer and have never met him.” Response from Resilient: “Over the years, Resilient had some interaction with Oberholzer and is aware of his interest in Resilient as a shareholder. Following recent public speculation about Oberholzer, the chair of Resilient’s audit committee did speak with him and, with his permission, [have] provided his contact details to Mr Shauket Fakie as regards the independent review he is leading. “Resilient and its board and management do not have any interest in or commercial relationship with any of the ‘K’ companies mentioned or with their directors or shareholders. It would not be appropriate for Resilient to provide public comment regarding any shareholder that it has no interest in or commercial relationship with.” Additional follow up questions to Oberholzer went unanswered. Given that his personal address in Paulshof was listed as the registered address for all four companies, we took a drive to see what residence a man that has enjoyed such incredible success occupies. The house would be modest by a billionaire’s standard, modest even by Warren Buffet standards. There is nothing wrong with a modest man owing large tranches of a company’s shares. But it is human nature to wonder how such a man came to own over R1 billion worth of Resilient shares, and why.