Head of tax and financial sector policy at National Treasury, Ismail Momoniat, has told parliament’s Standing Committee on Finance that regardless of whether the issues it raised were valid or not, Viceroy’s approach in releasing its report on Capitec raised serious concerns. “The way they released the report was very reckless,” said Momoniat. “If they were really concerned about the credit practices of Capitec they would have taken it up in a different, more constructive way without bringing risk to the bank.” He suggested that Viceroy’s own admission that it had a financial interest in the price of Capitec securities falling could not simply be ignored. “Though they say that they acted in the public interest, they placed an emphasis on the price decline,” said Momoniat. “They are no fans of shareholders or pension funds that might have money there. Their aim is to make sure shareholders lose value, in which case they make money.” An additional concern was at the time that it released the report, Viceroy was essentially an anonymous entity. “When they released the report, nobody even knew who the three of them were,” Momoniat said. “It was done anonymously. Not only were they not regulated, they were unknown.” Similar concerns were also raised by Capitec’s CEO Gerrie Fourie, who argued that it is unclear if Viceroy is regulated in any way in any jurisdiction. “We have investigated how Viceroy operates,” Fourie said. “They don’t disclose anything on how they are regulated. But we have definitely picked up that there are three hedge fund managers behind them, feeding them information.” He added that Viceroy’s modus operandi has been consistent across all the companies around the world on which it has issued reports. They identify companies trading on high price-to-earnings ratios, they short the company, openly admit that they will profit from a price decline, and operate through the media without engaging with the company itself. “Our biggest concern is that if you look at other companies that they have attacked, these are companies selling retail products so the consumer can decide if they want that product or not,” said Fourie. “But as a bank you are selling trust. If you create uncertainty for a depositor they will ask questions about their money, and that’s why for us we have to handle it carefully and answer all allegations.” Deputy governor at the South African Reserve Bank (Sarb) Kuben Naidoo, added that Capitec was considered a systemically important bank and it was therefore crucial that the Sarb had to move to settle the market as it did very quickly after the Viceroy report was released. “Based on the information we have, the allegations in the Viceroy report are not correct,” Naidoo said. “The bank does not unduly reschedule loans and does not use rescheduling to reduce its needs for provisioning. Capitec also has adequate capital and adequate liquidity.” However, this does not mean that the regulators are not concerned about the allegations and haven’t taken them seriously. “We are concerned about lending practices in South Africa,” said Momoniat. “I don’t think we are tough enough. There needs to be a more intrusive approach. “As Treasury or regulators we are not here to defend or attack Capitec or Viceroy,” he added. “We’re not saying Capitec is innocent of this or that transgression. When there is information out in the public domain, I hope the regulators are doing their work and dealing with these issues.” Fourie agreed on the need to take the Viceroy reports seriously, despite their concerns about how they were written and released. “Personally and with a team of 20 to 30 people we have investigated and evaluated every allegation to make sure that we are complaint and are doing things correctly,” he said. “We have replied to every point raised by Viceroy on Sens.” DA member of parliament, Gwen Ngwenya, also argued that it’s important to separate any issues at Capitec from any wrongdoing on the part of Viceroy. However, if Viceroy has acted unlawfully, she said that regulators have to deal with it effectively as there is a wider reputational risk to South Africa. “The risk is not just to our listed companies, but also around the efficacy and ability of regulators,” Ngwenya noted. “If there is indeed wrongdoing, it is important to take to it up because there may be danger of systemic repuational damage where a report like this in future gains that much more traction because it is already believed that there is a lack of credibility.” Momoniat agreed that regulators have to be decisive. “We are just trying to say be careful of anyone screaming fire,” Momoniat said. “Whether there is a fire or not, anyone screaming fire can cause a stampede, and then people get hurt. That’s not the way you deal with regulatory problems.”