Here’s what caught our attention on Thursday. 1. Interest rate trimmed to 6.5% The South African Reserve Bank (Sarb) on Wednesday reduced the repurchase rate by 25 basis points. This is the second rate cut since July last year, and is also being regarded as a two-year low. Bloomberg reported that the Sarb forecasts that inflation will remain within the target band till the end of 2020. 2. Fuel hikes in April The Department of Energy said on Wednesday that petrol and diesel prices would increase in April. Petrol will go up by 72 cents and diesel will go up by 65 cents. The increases are a result of fuel and Road Accident Fund Levy increases. 3. Steinhoff saga probed, again and again The name “Steinhoff” can’t seem to stay off the headlines. The retailer submitted a report to the police, which according to Bloomberg, “contained no material information, does not implicate former CEO Markus Jooste and was effectively ‘malicious compliance”. Basically, the police were not satisfied. On Wednesday, Reuters reported that the Hawks were investigating three criminal cases against Steinhoff, and on Tuesday, Bloomberg reported that Jooste declined to appear before SA lawmakers to give reason for Steinhoff’s collapse, and he may be subpoenaed. That’s not all. Read more here on shelved bonuses and here on PwC probe on Steinhoff. 4. Moody’s downgrades Eskom Ratings agency Moody Investors Service, took the decision to downgrade Eskom to B2 saying the utility did not give a clear indication on how it plans to stabilise its finances and work on a long-term, sustainable plan to rescue itself. Eskom in the interim said it is addressing liquidity issues. Bloomberg reported that Eskom said it is disappointed by Moody’s decision, however the future looks promising. 5. Numbers coming up today Statistics SA have released the quarterly financial stats (QFS) for December 2017, which shows that there was a 3.5% increase in QFS compared to the previous quarter. The manufacturing industry  was the biggest contributor, at +5.8%. South Africa’s private sector credit figures and Money Supply for February will also be published today. Updates to follow.