Members of Choice Lifestyle Change are hoping that investigations started by business rescue practitioner Herman Bester from Tygerberg Trustees will provide them with answers about what happened to their money. Bester has been appointed as the business rescue practitioner for Free Agape Enterprises, the registered company under which Choice Lifestyle operated. His appointment was requested by the executrix of Maarten Stapelberg’s estate. Stapelberg, who passed away in December last year, was the sole director of Free Agape Enterprises and ran Choice Lifestyle from his offices in Gansbaai. Read: Choice Lifestyle Change director in apparent suicide Until it began running into difficulties towards the end of 2017, Choice Lifestyle had been paying members returns of up to 16% per month. Stapelberg claimed that this was achieved by offering guarantees for bridging finance transactions. Read: Choice Lifestyle was showing signs of collapse before director’s death However Bester’s initial enquiries have revealed no sign that Free Agape Enterprises or Choice Lifestyle conducted any kind of legitimate business at all. “The only money coming into the company bank account was from investors,” he told Moneyweb last week. “I cannot find any transactions that were commissions, or fees or any commercial transaction.” Bester has also raised serious concerns about Free Agape Enterprise’s corporate governance. “I couldn’t find accountants or auditors for this company,” he said. “There are no financial statements available. I could find no accounting system being used.” In addition, no tax returns have even been lodged with the South African Revenue Service (Sars) since 2014. Bank accounts In line with business rescue provisions, Bester has already held meetings with Free Agape Enterprises’s creditors across the country. This includes members who invested their money into Choice Lifestyle. A meeting in Pretoria was attended by 93 people, and in Polokwane 304 affected individuals showed up. This Polokwane meeting was also attended by Stapelberg’s associate, Wouter Botha, who was responsible for marketing Choice Lifestyle. Bester told Moneyweb that Botha had revealed that R370 million had been invested into Choice Lifestyle. The business rescue practitioner has, however, not yet been able to verify this figure, and did not find more than R80 000 in either the company account or any of a number of accounts in Stapelberg’s name. He did however identify a number of transactions between the company account and as many as 11 different bank accounts in Stapelberg’s name. “Between these and the Free Agape bank accounts there is money being transferred all the time,” said Bester. “We need to make sense of that. My focus is to determine who benefited.” Bester also identified payments that had been made by Botha since Stapelberg’s death. These were to Botha himself, Stapelberg’s wife Francis, and Botha’s fiancée Nadine van der Merwe. Liquidation If any company in business rescue cannot be salvaged, it will have to be liquidated. It seems inevitable that this will happen with Free Agape Enterprises, but Bester expressed his hope that it would happen in an orderly fashion and not compromise investigations into what had happened to investors’ money. This includes looking for offshore bank accounts or trusts that may have been set up to house assets. It is also likely that law enforcement agencies will need to be assisted in any criminal investigations that may follow. “We are in the middle of an investigation that will hopefully uncover more detail,” Bester said. “We hope to find assets somewhere.”