Barely hours after the United National Transport Union (UNTU) lifted the lid on regular hijacking of passenger trains in the country, six brand new Metrorail trains were hijacked and damaged in Pretoria. Metrorail subsequently suspended its train service in the Mamelodi Corridor, which will force more than 100 000 poor commuters to seek other modes of transport to get to work and back. The damage has been estimated at R6.5 million. Tshwane Member of the Mayoral Committee (MMC) for roads and transport Sheila Lynn Senkubuge said the suspension has put “unprecedented pressure on other public transport services such as minibus taxis” and the city’s bus services. “The negative impact of this decision will have a rippling effect on various aspects of people’s day-to-day lives, for example people arriving late at work or not making it at all, leading to labour relations action,” Senkubuge said. Moneyweb on Tuesday reported that UNTU  has asked for an increase of security on and around passenger trains following an increase in trains being hijacked by angry commuters and staff and passengers being robbed. UNTU described the situation as a “ticking time bomb” and warned that it might only be a matter of time before another major accident as trains are forced by hijackers to travel on tracks where other trains are scheduled to run. In a statement the Passenger Rail Agency of South Africa (Prasa) confirmed UNTU’s statements and admitted that it is “indeed sitting on a ticking time bomb”. This it said, is “as a result of unprecedented crime against passenger rail despite numerous efforts by Prasa to secure its service and protect its drivers and commuters including its infrastructure.” The agency said the private armed guards it had introduced on the Central Line in the Western Cape were attacked by criminals in an effort to steal their ammunition, while infrastructure secured by locked cages was bombed. “UNTU is also correct in its assertion that Prasa cannot replace its signalling due to the rate of vandalism and the public demand for passenger rail services.  This combination of challenges leaves Prasa with no option but to rapidly replace stolen cables and restore the service rather than allowing for thorough investigations. This results in Prasa having to apply for manual authorisation which, if not granted by the Rail Safety Regulator (RSR), would affect approximately numerous passenger trips across three provinces with Gauteng alone accounting for 1.5 million passenger,” the agency said. Prasa says it does not have the money to execute its main mandate namely to provide commuter rail services as well as upgrade its service, appoint extra staff and arm them to curb crime on its trains. It joined UNTU’s call for increased law enforcement “similar to the airport or Gautrain where there is a combination of both Gautrain security and law enforcement agencies”. Prasa said it is continuing to engage with the South African Police Service’s Rapid Rail Police and called for harsher sentences for rail-related crimes like copper cable and steel theft. It said crimes such as the stealing of rail flippers that anchor the rail tracks on the ground, the bombing of electrical transformers and the “unspeakable attacks on our staff” will eventually leave Prasa with no choice but to cancel its services on dangerous corridors. Prasa called for the reporting of rail-related crimes as part of the national crime statistics in an effort to focus attention on the problem. Prasa’s rail operator Metrorail said in a subsequent statement more than ten of its employees in Gauteng were attacked and withdrawn from operations in less than a week. On Tuesday night’s attacks train crew, security and customer services officials were assaulted and left traumatised. Metrorail spokesperson Lillian Mofokeng said while the operator sympathises with commuters who are frustrated by train delays, this does not justify criminality. “This criminal behaviour not only affects Metrorail but has compromised the lives of many commuters hence Metrorail’s decision to temporarily terminate the service with immediate effect. However, management will continue engaging with all stakeholders to find a long lasting solution to these many problems,” the operator said. “We call on commuters to work with Metrorail and the Police by ensuring that those vandalising these news trains are reported to the authorities. We invite the public to play an important role in protecting and preserving public assets belonging to them. It cannot be that while the country is desperately trying to improve its public transport system, with government injecting billions to make this a reality, others are determined to undermine this at all costs. This is a call to the public and leaders to expose those who place the lives of innocent commuters at risk through acts of arson and vandalism. Management emphasises the fact that in a case where such criminal activities continue, it will not hesitate to suspend services that will pose a risk to employees and the commuting public.” Read: https://www.moneyweb.co.za/news/south-africa/union-blows-whistle-on-hijacking-of-commuter-trains/ And listen to a terrified train driver operating under inhumane conditions:  Pictures: UNTU     Pictures: UNTU