How long can the global bull market continue? Should I invest in stocks with a South African bias or am I too late? These are the two questions retail investors, financial advisors and fund managers have recently been pondering. This is not surprising. Despite the FTSE/JSE All Share Index (Alsi) delivering roughly 17% over the past year, it only returned 6.1% per annum in the three years to the end of February. Of this, 3% came from Naspers. Louis Niemand, investment director at Investec Asset Management, says many investors don’t realise just how tough the last three years have been. The local market basically went sideways for two and a half years and only rallied during the latter part of 2017. “And even this rally was fairly concentrated.” However, since Cyril Ramaphosa was elected as new ANC president and replaced Jacob Zuma as head of state, confidence has slowly but surely returned to the economy. Amid renewed optimism, many US fund managers who have missed out on the recovery in Russia, Brazil and Mexico have been keen to purchase a basket of local stocks linked to the South African growth story. But investors also have to consider valuations. Niemand says the local market is still fairly expensive, but if Naspers is removed from the equation, the price-earnings (P/E) ratio of the Alsi drops from around 19 to 16. Over the last year, the P/E has declined from about 22 to 19, even though the market was up 17% over the same period, which means earnings growth outstripped the price increase. Earnings growth was mainly fuelled by Naspers (through Tencent) as well as resource shares following a rebound in commodity prices. “So that is where the earnings growth is coming from. [It has] nothing to do with the SA side of the economy,” Niemand says. Over the last year, earnings growth of 4% or 5% for local banks was considered “brilliant”, highlighting just how tough the environment has been for many South African stocks, he adds. “Hopefully Tencent can continue to grow earnings. Hopefully commodity prices stay high. We have seen iron ore coming under pressure over the last few weeks and hopefully the SA stocks can join the party.” The challenge is that rand hedges may come under pressure as a result of a stronger currency, Niemand says. On the international side, global markets have rerated strongly over the last five years. Niemand says to get a decent return from here onwards, the bulk of the returns will have to come from earnings growth. The potential for returns coming from further reratings is limited. It is against this background that investors are weighing their options and asking whether the global rally can continue and if they are too late to join the SA Inc investment wagon. Unfortunately, there are no clear answers to these questions, Niemand says. “If you ask these questions to different people you will get different answers. That’s how markets work.” Even inside Investec, portfolio managers are fiercely debating whether a defensive or aggressive position (or somewhere in the middle) is currently the best approach. Niemand says there is no certainty. “It looks like global growth can continue, which can continue to provide support to global equities but there’s a number of risks still out there.” These include debt considerations, political uncertainty and a potential trade war on the horizon. Locally, there is still potential for some local banks to rerate from about 13 to 16. “There is more rerating potential to come and then if the economy starts picking up you can actually see some earnings growth coming through, so there is still potential for this growth to continue but at the same time you have to have very strong earnings growth to start justifying Mr Price at a 25 multiple.” For investors, this uncertainty highlights the need to construct diversified portfolios that would be able to provide fire power if the rally continues, but that would also offer protection should stocks start to slide.