Virgin Atlantic Airways posted a loss last year as the weak pound hurt demand for flights from the UK and made it tougher for the carrier to compete with long-haul discounters led by Norwegian Air Shuttle. Revenue also fell and occupancy levels slipped, Virgin, founded by Richard Branson in 1984, said on Thursday in a statement. Chief executive officer Craig Kreeger said macro-economic factors will continue to make conditions tough this year, with higher UK inflation likely to “hit customers in their pockets.” While sterling’s slide following Britain’s 2016 vote to quit the European Union spurred a 20% increase in US-based customers, that hasn’t made up for the impact on the UK market, with overall passenger numbers 100 000 lower at 5.3 million. Hurricanes in the Caribbean and US also hurt sales and faults with Rolls-Royce Holdings engines affected aircraft availability. The pretax loss for 2017 was 28.4 million pounds ($40 million), excluding one-time items, compared with a profit of 23 million pounds the previous year. Kreeger is banking on a new “economy light” brand to lure price-sensitive customers and make Virgin Atlantic more immediately visible as people search for fares. The option includes hand baggage only and no guarantee that friends and families can sit together. An “economy delight” product will have a 34-inch seat pitch, three inches more than standard, priority boarding, checked luggage and free seat selection. Virgin Atlantic is facing a new breed of competitor as Norwegian Air builds London’s Gatwick airport into a major base. Network specialists are responding with lower-cost operations that could begin to threaten Virgin on some of its leisure-oriented routes. Long-time rival British Airways has established a new discount unit, Level, and this week said it separately plans to launch a no-frills “basic economy” fare of its own on long-haul flights. Crawley, England-based Virgin Atlantic is 49% owned by Atlanta-based Delta Air Lines, something the carrier said helped tap US custom after the Brexit vote. Europe’s biggest carrier Air France-KLM Group, a Delta ally, has also agreed to buy a 31% stake in a move that will see billionaire Branson’s holding reduced to 20 %. Three or four of Virgin’s Boeing Co. 787 fleet have been grounded at any one time for fixes to their Rolls-Royce Trent 1000 engines amid durability issues. The airline is currently in talks with Rolls, which has made payments to cover costs, and is also leasing Airbus SE A330s to provide extra capacity cover. Virgin Atlantic is also uniquely exposed to UK-US leisure flows and to the Caribbean destinations ravaged by storms throughout 2017, Kreeger said. © 2018 Bloomberg