Disgraced Gauteng former personal injury attorneys Ronald and Darren Bobroff await the judgement regarding whether their personal estates should be finally sequestrated. The case was argued in the Johannesburg High Court earlier this month before Judge Edwin Molahlehi. The Bobroffs were provisionally sequestrated in March last year with Acting Judge Etienne Theron noting that “assets may be unearthed that will benefit creditors”. Read Bobroffs provisionally sequestrated Strong denials The Bobroffs strenuously denied that they or their firm, Ronald Bobroff & Partners Incorporated (RBP), owed a total of R3 million to Christine Maree, a 79-year-old Pretoria widow who was the victim of medical negligence, and Yasmin Motara, a 32-year-old Springs teacher who was the innocent party in a catastrophic and life-changing motor vehicle accident. Maree and Motara are the applicants in the sequestration application. In March last year, having agreed to hand themselves over to the Hawks for arrest and the arranging of bail, they fled the country for Sydney, Australia as fugitives from South African justice and have continued to litigate prodigiously against their South African creditors. Ronald and Darren, in opposing their provisional sequestration, stated that they each had some R5 000 in personal creditors, while Darren’s Victory Park home was bonded to Nedbank. Requisitions When the creditor requisitions arrived thick and fast after the granting of the provisional sequestration order, a different picture emerged. Here are a few examples: R102 million seized in Israel Attorney Anthony Millar, acting for Maree and Motara, had filed papers in court in support of the final sequestration order which pointed out that the Pretoria High Court had in July last year obtained a preservation order in terms of the Prevention of Organised Crime Act seizing R102 million held in the names of Ronald and Darren Bobroff by the Bank Mizrahi Tefahot in Israel. The Bobroffs opposed the evidence alleging that it was hearsay. The morning of the final sequestration hearing Much to the surprise of the judge, and the lawyers present in court – particularly the Bobroffs’ senior counsel, Arnold Subel – an affidavit by Ronald Bobroff dated March 1 2018 was handed in. In it he makes the following startling admissions: Judge Molahlehi indicated that he would hand down his judgment on Friday, March 23. Attorney Johan Cameron responded on behalf of the Bobroffs telling Moneyweb that the matter was sub judice which prevented him or his clients from issuing statements on the case. Cameron also alleges that this journalist was not present during the proceedings, an allegation which is demonstrably false. Anthony Millar told Moneyweb that he denied any wrongdoing: “We will continue to pursue all lawful means to obtain payment for our clients of what is due to them. We are confident that justice will prevail.” No response was forthcoming from Jaches and Meyerthal. Disclosure: This journalist is one of a number of individuals presently suing the Bobroffs for defamation. Read Bobroffs slapped with R24 million defamation suit Read attorney Cameron’s full response and Ronald Bobroff’s affidavit here: Cameron response and Ronald Bobroff affidavit.