Over the past 10 years, listed property has outperformed all other local asset classes. As a result, property funds have dominated the unit trust performance tables. For the decade between the start of 2008 and the end of 2017, 13 of the top 20 unit trusts in the country were property funds. The best of them delivered an annualised return over this period of 17.75%. Read: SA’s top unit trusts over 10 years So far this year, however, listed property has faced a much tougher ride. Concerns around the Resilient group of companies have seen shares in these REITs sell off aggressively, and that has had a significant impact on a number of unit trusts. Read: Resilient group of REITs pummelled as short sellers raise bets Over the year to date Resilient’s share price has fallen over 40%, Nepi Rockcastle is down close to 30%, Greenbay is off 13%, and Fortress B has shed over 50%. Funds exposed to these companies have suffered as a consequence. In just the first two months of this year, the worst-performing property funds have dropped close to 30%. The table below shows the five funds that have seen the largest drawdowns so far in 2018. Source: Morningstar The first thing to note is that the two funds that have come worst off were actually the two top-performing funds in this category last year. The Absa Property Equity Fund and Metope MET Property Fund both produced returns above 24% in 2017. This performance placed them among the top 15 funds across all categories for the 12 months to the end of December. In just under nine weeks, however, they have both more than given up all of those gains. What is significant is that this boom and bust have the same cause – these funds were highly exposed to the Resilient group of REITs. Last year, this was great for investors as Resilient was up around 35%, Greenbay soared 60%, and Fortress gained over 30%. However, so far in 2018, exactly the opposite has been true. The below table shows their holdings at the end of December last year. Source: Morningstar In Metope’s case, these four REITs were the fund’s top four holdings, with a combined weighting of over 50%. ABSA was slightly less exposed at a combined total of 44.5%, but Nepi Rockcastle, Resilient and Fortress were its top three holdings. Not all property funds have however been in this boat. As the table below shows, the top-performing real estate unit trusts so far this year have managed to deliver positive returns. Source: Morningstar This divergence of returns is enormous. Over just two months, the difference between the best and worst performing property funds is almost 32%. It’s also worth noting that, in complete contrast to Metope and Absa’s offerings, the Marriott and Nedgroup funds were among the three worst-performing funds in this category 2017. It almost goes without that the reason is that they both carried zero exposure to any of the Resilient group REITs. The longer term impact of Resilient’s difficulties is that the performance of property funds over the past three years now looks decidedly mediocre. The table below shows the top performers in this category over this period. Source: Morningstar Over the same time frame the top-performing South African general equity fund has delivered an annualised return of over 10%. Even the leading bond funds have returned over 9% per year. This period of weakness has therefore certainly taken some of the shine off the listed property sector. Managers will have some work to do to recover these losses, starting with ensuring some better diversification in their portfolios.