South African consumers are now being offered a new type of stokvel savings option with the Grocery Stokvel Account at Pick n Pay stores. The Grocery Stokvel account is the product of a collaboration between Absa Bank and Pick n Pay stores. The aim is to give communities or groups with a common savings goal an opportunity to make purchases of better value and earn interest on their savings at the same time. There was a gap for a savings solution that would address stokvel members’ needs to save for groceries safely and securely, but one that also provided a competitive interest rate on savings, says Papi Rapolai, GM for Wholesale and Stokvel at Pick n Pay. Rapolai says that based on Pick n Pay’s experience in working with stokvels, many groups miss out on earning interest from their annual savings, or earn a very low rate. “Stokvels tend to keep their savings at home – which holds the risk of theft – or their savings are deposited into accounts where the interest rate isn’t tailored specifically for them. For example, banks tend to pay higher interest rates for balances greater than R100 000, but many stokvels save between R20 000 and R50 000 annually, which generates a lower rate of interest.” With the new Grocery Stokvel Account, stokvels are able to earn a very competitive interest rate on balances of as little as R50, and spend their money safely and conveniently at Pick n Pay, where they receive further savings on groceries. “The account also doesn’t charge monthly management fees or for the first Absa ATM or in-branch cash deposit each month, so money saved goes to building the stokvel’s value,” he adds. The acting CEO of the South African Savings Institute, Gerald Mwandiambira, said this stokvel product is the first of its kind. The product seeks to address the issue of interest earnings in stokvels. Mwandiambira said often people purchase products on lay-bys and deposit the money with the actual store on a monthly basis, which means that they do not earn an interest [on these deposits]. “The consumer is getting something back with the product,” he said. There are over 800 000 stokvels in South Africa, and according to Mwandiambira, the stokvel market is valued at between R44 billion and R50 billion. Read: Potent stokvels In 2016, Pick n Pay teamed up with the National Stokvel Association of South Africa (Nasasa) to deliver more value to its customer base. Pick n Pay later launched the Smart Shopper Wholesale Stokvel card to provide additional benefits and discounts for members of stokvels. With customers likely to save through stokvel schemes, a significant portion of those savings will sit with retailers, meaning that retailers would also benefit by gaining customer loyalty in the long term, and this may prompt other retailers to follow suit. “It’s likely that other retailers may follow suit because it has been a concern for stokvels that they don’t accrue any interest on money they put with retailers. So in order to keep their clients it will probably be likely that other retailers will follow suit,” he said. He added that the South African Savings Institute supports the collaboration between Absa and Pick n Pay and their efforts to address the challenges that the stokvel market faces.