JSE-listed airline group Comair will in January next year become the first airline in Africa to fly Boeing’s new 737 MAX8 aircraft when it takes receipt of the first of eight to be delivered over a four-year period. Comair CEO Erik Venter on Thursday said constant fleet renewal is key to Comair’s success in an environment where airline costs are growing faster than the income from passenger fares. The first two Boeing 737 MAX8s will be allocated to Comair’s British Airways service and the next three arriving the following year, to its low-cost kulula.com. The subsequent arrivals have not yet been allocated. Venter said the airline industry has seen massive cost inflation driven by increased fuel cost and currency fluctuations with no growth in the local market since 2005. Source: Comair   Source: Comair He said that since 2001, Comair has succeeded in reducing its fuel burn per seat by 54% through fleet renewal. That translates to savings of R1.3 billion per year. He said further significant savings were incurred, as newer aircraft needed less time on the ground for maintenance. The new aircraft will provide Comair with additional seats as well as a 14% reduction in fuel burn, Venter said. The airline is in fact still running 26 planes, as in 2001, but carries three times more passengers, which results in economies of scale. Boeing International’s regional managing director K Miguel Santos said Africa holds huge potential for airline growth. The International Air Transport Association (IATA) estimates that Africa has just 2.2% of the global airline passenger share, but 16% of the world’s population, he said. “Africa also has a number of fine, large airports, many of which are under-utilised, and Open Skies [the aviation policy] could help ensure these are used to their full potential,” he said. “That growth will help drive a demand for personnel, which mirrors a global trend: Boeing’s most recent Boeing Commercial Outlook estimates that Africa will need 20 000 new pilots, 24 000 new technicians and 26 000 new cabin crew by 2035. Considering that the ten countries worldwide with the youngest populations are all in Africa, this will be a boon for youngsters seeking aviation careers.” Comair’s shares traded 0.65% higher on Thursday afternoon at R6.19. Over the last 30 days it increased by almost 10%.