When Malusi Gigaba set off on an international roadshow in April last year shortly after he was appointed as finance minister to replace the highly-respected Pravin Gordhan, one goal was high on his agenda. This was to restore investor confidence after SA earned two bruising credit rating downgrades from S&P Global and Fitch Ratings. Gigaba met his global counterparts at the IMF/World Bank Spring meetings and rating agency Moody’s Investors Service in the US at the height of SA’s political uncertainty under Jacob Zuma’s rein, rampant corruption at state-owned enterprises and moribund economic growth. Gigaba’s investor charm offensive probably lost its effect as he was not accompanied by high-profile business leaders who usually join government officials on road shows with investors. Eleven months later, with Zuma being replaced by Cyril Ramaphosa as SA’s president and sweeping changes to the cabinet that included the reinstallation of investor-friendly Nhlanhla Nene as finance minister, international investors might now be wooed by government’s platitudes of SA having “a good story to tell”. The UK and US international roadshow began on Tuesday, with an SA delegation including National Treasury and Reserve Bank officials, and business leaders meeting with S&P, Fitch and Moody’s, and bond investors. Although all rating agencies and private investors welcomed the February budget, the new political administration, the pending commission of inquiry into state capture, and reform measures at SAA and Eskom – the land debate dominated investor roadshows. Jabu Mabuza, the chairman of the Eskom board and Business Unity SA president, said government’s plan to expropriate land without compensation was a prominent feature during discussions with rating agencies and investors. “We told investors that they have to acknowledge that land reform and restitution is a crucial instrument for fostering economic transformation and has remained unresolved for far too long in our country,” Mabuza, who was part of the SA delegation, told Moneyweb. The stage is set for the government to begin a process to amend Section 25 of the Constitution in order to expropriate land without compensation. The Section 25 clause currently prohibits the deprivation of property and promotes expropriation with “just and equitable” compensation. The expropriation proposal has widely been viewed as an attack on property rights across all sectors of the economy. Ramaphosa has been at pains to allay investor fears, saying the proposal doesn’t mean promoting illegal land grabs – but it must be done in a manner that doesn’t harm the economy and improves food security. The exact meaning and mechanics of how this will be done is yet to be clarified. Mabuza said the issue of land is “highly emotive” and requires “all of us to remain calm, level-headed and exercise considerable caution”. “We cannot excuse the issue of land ownership and access to land and still talk about inclusive economic growth and transformation,” he said. “I believe that there is a sincere and genuine endeavour by the government to address this [economic growth and transformation] while realising that they have failed to address this in the last 24 years.” This was largely the message to allay the fears of rating agencies and private investors. Mabuza also subscribes to Ramaphosa’s playbook, saying there must be a balance between the urgent need to redistribute land to previously disadvantaged individuals and acting in a responsible manner so the economy is not impacted. Earlier in March, MPs voted in favour of a motion to begin a process to amend Section 25 of the Constitution to allow land expropriation without compensation. The matter is now with the Constitutional Review Committee, which will review whether expropriation without compensation is prudent and work around the wording of amending Section 25. The committee has to report back to Parliament by August 31 2018. Bonang Mohale, the Business Leadership SA CEO who also attended the investor meetings, said the decision to task the Constitutional Review Committee with the amendments will ensure that the matter is conducted in a “sound, transparent and constitutional manner”. “The committee will deal with the matter of land and we are closing out the possibility of it falling into the hands of people that are populist and might use it to increase their popularity rather than offer more clarity. We need changes that will make SA more resilient.” The purpose of the roadshows is also to prepare SA to raise $3 billion from international capital markets. Mohale said the capital markets have responded positively to recent political and state reform developments in SA.