South African tax agency commissioner Tom Moyane was suspended and will face disciplinary proceedings as newly elected President Cyril Ramaphosa’s administration moved to restore trust in the institution. Mark Kingon has been appointed acting Commissioner. Ramaphosa has replaced Jacob Zuma appointees in the government since taking over the presidency last month after his predecessor was forced to step down by the ruling party. He has also removed boards of state companies as he seeks to boost investor confidence after years of weak economic growth. The decision on Monday followed a meeting between Moyane and Ramaphosa during which the head of the South African Revenue Service refused a request to resign, the Presidency said in a statement. Ramaphosa said in a letter to Moyane that under his leadership there had been a deterioration in public confidence in the agency and that public finances had been “compromised.” “For the sake of the country and the economy, this situation cannot be allowed to continue, or to worsen,” the president said in the letter. Read the letter here. South African Revenue Service Commissioner Tom Moyane will seek a legal interdict against Cyril Ramaphosa if the president does not stop trying to remove him from the tax agency, according to people familiar with the matter. Ramaphosa has been given until 9:30 p.m. Monday to respond to a letter from Moyane calling for him to back down, said the people, who asked not to be identified as the move hasn’t been made public. If the president doesn’t respond, the tax chief will go to court, they said. SARS didn’t immediately respond to a request for comment. Presidency spokeswoman Khusela Diko declined to comment. Public Enterprises Minister Pravin Gordhan, who previously clashed with Moyane while he was finance minister, said in a wide-ranging interview last week that the revenue service’s leadership has “lost all credibility.” The government agreed to probe under-collection by the nation’s tax service in November after the National Treasury forecast a revenue shortfall of about R50 billion ($4.2 billion) this fiscal year. Moyane faced criticism from lawmakers for his handling of an investigation into accusations his former deputy Jonas Makwakwa and his partner received R1.2 million in suspicious payments, and allegations of mismanaging tax refunds. Moyane has denied wrongdoing. “President Ramaphosa indicated that as SARS Commissioner, Mr Moyane holds a high position of trust in the management of the country’s public finances,” the Presidency said. “It was therefore necessary to act urgently and immediately to protect the institution and place it on a path to stability and recovery.” © 2018 Bloomberg