It’s official: Cash Paymaster Services (CPS), a subsidiary of Net1 UEPS, will still be part of the social grants payment system when its contract with the South African Social Security Agency (Sassa) expires on April 1. The Constitutional Court on Friday extended CPS’s contract with Sassa for the administration of social grants for another six months, ending September 2018. The judgment comes at a time when Sassa was meant to end its relationship with CPS by March 31, 2018, or in a week’s time. In February, Sassa CEO Pearl Bhengu launched a court application to extend the invalid contract with CPS to pay a portion of social grants for another six months from April 1, 2018. In justifying CPS’s involvement in the social grant payment network – despite its contract being declared invalid by the same court in 2014 for not going through proper tender processes – Bhengu said Sassa had been unable to find an alternative service provider to pay elderly and disabled beneficiaries. These beneficiaries are “unbanked”, or in other words, do not have bank accounts and are unable to register with financial institutions, but access their social grants in a physical cash format via pay points kitted with CPS software and technology, said Bhengu. In a unanimous judgment delivered by Justice Leona Theron, the court said it granted the extension to CPS and lifted the invalidity of its contract to ensure that payments to grant beneficiaries, who are paid in cash, continue. CPS agreed to pay grants for an additional six months, only if the fee it’s paid by Sassa to distribute social grants (currently R16.44 per beneficiary) is increased to an undisclosed amount. Read more: CPS sees R420m losses under extended Sassa contract Theron said CPS may request the National Treasury to investigate and make a recommendation regarding the price to be paid for its services. The Treasury must file a report with the court in 21 days, setting out its recommended price for CPS services. Under the extended contract, CPS will not assume the function of paying all 10.7 million social grant beneficiaries. The company will be required to only pay 2.5 million elderly and disabled beneficiaries until September 2018. The remaining eight million beneficiaries will access their social grants via bank ATMs or retail points. In a hearing at the court in early March, Sassa told the court that it had no contingency plan to pay elderly and disabled beneficiaries. It was agreed that the South African Post Office and commercial banks will take over social grant payments when CPS’s contract ends. Sassa has argued that the Post Office does not have the capacity to pay elderly and disabled beneficiaries, as it still needs time to phase in its services to take over payments from CPS. Sassa said there would be chaos if the contract was not extended – giving the court any choice but to consider the six-month extension. The worst case scenario would be that beneficiaries would receive their grants but not by April 1 and not without causing widespread panic. The court justices were frustrated with Sassa, as the agency approached the court at the eleventh-hour for the extension – like in March last year when the court was forced to extend CPS’s contract for another 12 months to avoid a social grants crisis. With the latest six month extension, the court is not giving Sassa a blank cheque. The court has imposed more reporting requirements from Department of Social Development Minister Susan Shabangu and Sassa. Justice Theron said Shabangu and Sassa must file regular reports to the court in its implementation of CPS’ six-month extension; and Sassa’s progress will be monitored by a panel of experts appointed by the court, who will submit monthly reports. Although Bathabile Dlamini – who was largely blamed for the Sassa crisis as a former social development minister – has been reshuffled to the ministry of women under in Cyril Ramaphosa’s new cabinet, she still has to account for her role in Sassa. Dlamini and Sassa’s Bhengu must provide affidavits to the court on why they should not be personally joined in the matter and why they should not be ordered to pay legal costs out of their own pockets.