Steinhoff introduced two new resolutions at its most recent annual general meeting that sought to absolve directors and members of its management board of all liability in relation to the exercise of their duties for the financial year ending September 2016. At first glance, and to the untrained eye of South African investors, these resolutions are bewildering – they seek to absolve the management board which includes senior executive directors like the CEO and CFO of “all liability” for the applicable financial year. The same resolution was sought for the members of the supervisory board (board of directors) as can be seen below: Extract of minutes of the 2017 annual general meeting of Steinhoff International Holdings N.V held on 14 March 2017: Source: Steinhoff 2017 AGM This was the first time any such resolution had been sought by the company. Both resolutions were overwhelmingly approved by shareholders, 98% voted in the affirmative in both instances. Given what we now know about Steinhoff, this move would appear to be highly suspicious. But this is not the case says Joeri Klein, a manager at Deminor Recovery Services, one of the firms representing shareholders in respect of losses sustained in Steinhoff. Steinhoff International Holdings – the listed parent company – was incorporated in The Netherlands and according to Dutch company law the discharge relates to what Klein terms an “internal liability or responsibility” the directors and executives have to the company to fulfil their responsibilities in a “generally accepted” and “professional” manner. As a standard practice, the discharge is designed to bring closure to the responsibility of directors for that particular year, thereby preventing them from carrying open-ended liabilities. But the discharge in no way removes the liability of directors and executives towards third parties like shareholders and creditors. “The possibility of discharging members of the management and supervisory board is a standard clause of the statutes of almost all listed companies in Europe, and generally the discharge is given at the annual general meeting through a vote by shareholders. Generally, if there are no problems, the AGM grants the discharge. If there are problems that are apparent at the time, the AGM does not grant a discharge. If later on (after the vote on a discharge) new information comes to light, the granted discharge does not apply to these new facts,” says Klein. That last line is important. In the case of Steinhoff, with the company admitting to “accounting irregularities” that will lead to the restatement of the 2016 annual financial statements that were presented to shareholders for adoption at this specific AGM, it is quite clear that new information has come to light. This means that the company has every right to argue that the discharge should fall away and that it can follow its rights in pursuing legal action against directors and executives implicated in the accounting scandal. So will it? According to Klein, this is probably unlikely. By pursuing legal action against current and former executives and directors there is a good chance the company would be opening a pandora’s box that might result in disclosure of wider corporate malfeasance that could bring further legal ramifications for a company that is already facing legal challenges, penalties and lawsuits on a number of fronts. The company was noncommittal on whether it would be pursuing this option. A spokesperson for Steinhoff told Moneyweb: “Steinhoff is fully committed to uncovering the truth, fix what went wrong, prosecute wrongdoing and restore value to investors. Based on current advice received we are of the view that the discharge of liability does not extend to fraudulent and illegal conduct and the discharge remains a requirement to conduct business under Dutch law.”