The Viceroy report on Steinhoff that coincided with the resignation of CEO Markus Jooste in December last year, and which made the hitherto anonymous research firm the most feared operator on the JSE, appears to have extensively plagiarised the work of London-based Portsea Asset Management. Steinhoff’s share price fell precipitously in the days that followed Jooste’s resignation and the announcement by the company that it would be investigating “accounting irregularities”. Many institutional investors we spoke to in the aftermath referenced Viceroy’s report as a way to explain what had happened at Steinhoff. None that we know of took issue with any of the allegations or conclusions made in the report. In fact, just the rumour that a company could be the next target of a Viceroy report sent the share price reeling, as Aspen learnt in January this year. The report in Moneyweb’s possession entitled “Steinhoff – the empire-builder has no clothes” was written and compiled as far back as June 2017 by a team of analysts at Portsea Asset Management. The report provides a lucid and precise description of Steinhoff’s apparent “accounting irregularities” using off balance sheet vehicles and includes analysis the firm performed which shows the extent to which Steinhoff’s earnings and balance sheet was engineered, particularly through its relationships with entities controlled by Siegmar Schmidt. Thoughtful consideration of the report leaves the reader in no doubt as to the degree of accounting manipulation Steinhoff appeared to have undertaken, including possible misrepresentations made by  senior executives of Steinhoff  to members of its own investor relations team as far back as April 2017, when Portsea inquired about a number of loans the company made to Steinhoff’s “Chinese suppliers”. But when read in conjunction with Viceroy’s work on the same company, it is alarming how many similarities there are between Portsea’s report and that of Viceroy. For starters, look at the tables published on page four of the Portsea report and page two of the Viceroy report respectively (see below). The tables attempt to demonstrate how much Steinhoff has overstated earnings by making a series of adjustments to the company’s forecast consensus net income that reflects what the respective firms deem is a more accurate figure of the situation. Portsea table: Portsea adjustments to Steinhoff net income  Viceroy table: Adjustments to Steinhoff net income  Both tables represent the cornerstone of the respective reports by quantifying the degree to which Steinhoff has inflated profits. The adjusted net income in both cases was then used as the basis to estimate Steinhoff’s value. The quantum of the adjustments and the order of the adjustments are virtually identical, including perhaps the most subjective item: the adjustments to depreciation (listed as “add depreciation..” and “add more depreciation”) respectively. There are differences in the tables. Where Portsea subtracts 50% of “other operating income”, Viceroy chose to subtract the entire amount (100%). And, perhaps with the benefit of six months more work, Viceroy includes a new line item “minority interest re Conforama & Poco”. Asides from that, the analysis yields materially the same adjustments. In addition to this example, we found another eight tables in the Portsea report that were identical to tables in the Viceroy report. Viceroy also referred to a number of “analyst calls to Steinhoff’s investor relations in April 2017…” in its report that were made to ascertain exactly to whom the company had extended loans and from which it was reporting income in its financial statements. As can be seen from the Portsea extract below, the firm also contacted the Steinhoff investor relations team, and were told the loans were made to “Chinese suppliers”. It just so happens that this inquiry – according to the footnote – was made on April 21 2017. Extract from Portsea report:  However nowhere in the Viceroy report is Portsea attributed or even mentioned. Viceroy presents all of its analysis as its own. This seems like either a remarkable coincidence or a clear case of plagiarism. Fraser Perring, the head of Viceroy, is adamant that his firm does not cooperate with any other investors, and ahead of the Steinhoff report, spoke with no other people in England. “We reiterate what we have told other journalists: we have had no communication with any of the hedge funds or analysts prior to our publication [of the Steinhoff report], including the nonsensical speculation US hedge funds are writing our reports. We are not entering into schoolboy speculation on “who-knows-who”. The sell-side should focus their scrutiny toward Capitec and Steinhoff, especially those who didn’t test their analysis and were caught unawares. Some of those individuals are now validating our work on Capitec. We suggest journalists scratch below the surface instead of speculating, it makes for better analysis.” – Fraser Perring. Portsea declined to comment.