After a long period of weak performance, 2017 was a good year for the JSE. The S&P South Africa Domestic Shareholder Weighted (DSW) Index was up 22.6%. The vast majority of investors in local equity funds did not, however, see this level of return. According to the latest S&P Indices Versus Active (SPIVA) scorecard, only 4.08% of South African funds beat this benchmark. That is only marginally more than one in every 25 funds. It must however be acknowledged that a huge part of the market’s performance was driven by Naspers. The media giant was up 71.8% last year, and given that it makes up around 23% of the index, this had a massive impact. Most fund managers would not carry this level of exposure to a single stock, simply because it is too risky. An index with this level of concentration is therefore not the best way to measure relative performance. S&P Dow Jones therefore also provides a comparison with the S&P South Africa DSW Capped Index, which limits the weight of any single stock to 10% in the index. This is a more realistic benchmark, but still one that active managers struggled to beat. As the table below indicates, only between one quarter and one fifth of funds outperformed this benchmark over the one-, three- and five-year periods ending December 31 2017. Source: S&P Dow Jones What is particularly significant is that to the end of June 2017, 44.95% of funds had outperformed the S&P South Africa DSW Index over 12 months. The latest figures therefore show a huge turnaround in fortunes in the second half of the year. “The large increase in funds underperforming the benchmark since the mid-year SPIVA Scorecard may indicate that active fund managers were not positioned well to take advantage of the unexpected mid-year rate cut and political landscape,” S&P Dow Jones noted. It’s also notable that, the average performance of South African equity funds is well below this benchmark. This remains true even if one uses an asset-weighted average, which is a better indication of the return most investors receive as larger funds are given a higher weighting. Source: S&P Dow Jones Local bond fund managers did however continue to demonstrate their ability to beat the benchmark. As the below table shows, both short-term and variable-term funds fared significantly better than the benchmark over almost all time periods. Source: S&P Dow Jones