Following the publication of the following article: Concern, shock about financial planning exam results –  the FPI adds the following context: As a world-class professional body that is internationally affiliated to Financial Planning Standards Board (FPSB), FPI promotes and upholds the CFP® certification as a standard of excellence amongst financial planners and advisors as well as drive certification for the FSA designation. Keeping the high demand for CFP® professionals in mind, the lower pass rate is of concern to us. FPI has in place a robust, best practice, process of developing, quality assuring, marking and delivering the PCE exams in a bid to ensure that we always maintain the twin objective of upholding the standard of the exams as well as fairness towards to candidates. With this in mind, we are comfortable that the results for this exam seating is a fair reflection on the performance of the individuals that wrote this exam. To date, a number of candidates that sat for the February 2018 seating of the exam have exercised their rights, as per the FPI Professional Competency Examination policy, and requested a remark or lodged the necessary appeals. The exam paper as well as the model answers were made available on the FPI online learning platform. Candidates also have a right to view their scripts as per the PCE policy. We encourage other candidates to do so. The process is still ongoing. FPI will continue to work with the education and training providers, as well as candidates, to better prepare them for the PCE. The next batch of PCEs are scheduled to take place in August 2018. Candidates are encouraged to make use of available resources from FPI to assist in preparing for the examinations. These include: FPI (South Africa) is one of the 25 FPSB affiliate member countries which offer the coveted CFP® certification outside of the United States. This places South African CFP® professionals in the upper echelons of the world’s financial planning professions, meaning that they are qualified to operate anywhere in the globe. FPI is proud that it is at the centre of continuous professional development of our country’s financial planners by setting the high standards and competency examinations, and confer certification that enable them to reach their professional dreams.