Here are some of the things people in markets are talking about today. One view With the firing of Secretary of State Rex Tillerson, President Donald Trump continued his policy of surrounding himself with loyalists who share his world view, while dismissing dissenting voices. The president’s moves seem to be an extension of his declaration on the day he accepted the Republican nomination when he said “I alone can fix” the problems the US faces. Whether voters approve of the president’s moves remains an open question, with results of yesterday’s Pennsylvania special election still too close to call, in a district Trump won by 20 points in 2016. Spy saga UK Prime Minister Theresa May will set out her government’s response against Russia, following the nerve agent attack on a former spy and his daughter, in parliament today. She could expel diplomats, remove the broadcast license for the country’s English-language television arm, and prevent UK officials from attending this year’s soccer World Cup in Russia. Measures that go further would need international support. Away from the diplomatic mess, May is also facing further pressure on Brexit as a revised draft text of the treaty on the UK exit does nothing to water down proposals the prime minister has already rejected. Strong start China’s economy has had a better-than-expected start to the year, with factory output and investment in fixed assets exceeding economists’ expectations in the first two months of this year and retail sales remaining robust. The outlook may not be so rosy, with domestic headwinds from deleveraging and the country’s tech sector said to be the latest target for new US tariffs. In political circles, it is not tariffs that are the biggest worry, but rather the US position on Taiwan, with China prepared to take a tough stance on any American deals with the disputed territory. Markets mixed Overnight, the MSCI Asia Pacific Index declined 0.4% while Japan’s Topix index closed 0.5% lower as the region’s stocks tracked US losses. In Europe, the Stoxx 600 Index was 0.3% higher at 5:50 am Eastern Time with miners and consumer discretionary stocks leading the gains. S&P 500 futures pointed to a gain at the open, the 10-year Treasury yield was at 2.841% and gold was lower. Coming up… At 8:30 am, US retail sales numbers for February are released, with expectations for 0.3% growth in both headline and ex-auto and gas data. At the same time, PPI for February is published, with a 0.1% increase expected. In Europe, there are several members of ECB’s governing council speaking at a conference in Frankfurt today, with Mario Draghi’s speech earlier promising the bank would remain predictable and measured. © 2018 Bloomberg