Sars has appointed eight external debt collection agencies to recoup some of the current R16.6 billion tax deficit. These agencies will be on contract with Sars until February 2019. Colien de Villiers, a tax administrator at CAP Chartered Accountants, offers the following advice to any South Africans contacted by one of these 3rd party debt collectors: “Firstly, make sure that they are in fact one of the enlisted agencies. These are: ➢CSS Credit Solution Services (Pty) Ltd 
➢ITC Business Administrators (Pty) Ltd 
➢Medaco Capital Services (Pty) Ltd 
➢New Integrated Credit Solutions (Pty) Ltd 
➢Norman Bisset & Associates Group (Pty) Ltd 
➢Revenue Consulting (Pty) Ltd 
➢Transactional Capital Recoveries (Pty) Ltd 
➢Van De Venter Mojapelo (Pty) Ltd. “Unfortunately we do anticipate some illegal activity around this announcement, with fake debt collection agents contacting people claiming to be from one of the above listed agencies. Because of this our strong advice is to not give any of your personal information to them – and do not confirm any information that they provide over the phone.” “Under no circumstances should debtors pay money directly to the debt collection agency. All outstanding tax or duties must only be paid directly to Sars via authorised payment channels,” advises de Villiers. CAP Chartered Accountants suggests that all South Africans who find themselves being contacted by a Sars debt collector contact their tax practitioner immediately and provide them with the name and contact details of the agency. “It can be nerve-racking to receive a call from any debt collector. Stay calm, request that they send you all their details, both the agent and the agency, and the details of the claimed tax debt in writing.” “This information, and any other communications received from any agency claiming to collect outstanding Sars debt, must then be forwarded to your tax practitioner (i.e letters, smses or emails) and your tax practitioner can contact the agency to verify their credentials and confirm the validity of any claimed outstanding Sars debt.” De Villiers concludes by advising that anyone with queries or looking for assistance can contact CAP Chartered Accountants on 086 177 7227 or the Sars National Contact Centre at 0800 00 7277 (0800 00 Sars).