At the announcement of Nedbank’s annual results to December 31 2017, chief executive Mike Brown said that last year was one of “almost unprecedented domestic volatility”. South Africa’s political challenges, downgrades by the international ratings agencies and large corporate events all impacted the operating environment. “Business and consumer confidence throughout 2017 were at multi-year lows,” said Brown. “This had the most impact on our corporate and investment banking and wealth management segments where customers were postponing decision-making or postponing investment.” It was therefore not surprising that Nedbank produced fairly subdued results. Headline earnings were up just 2.8%, and return on equity (ROE) was steady at 16.4%. The bank did however increase its full-year dividend to R12.85, which is a 7.1% increase. “This was largely in line with expectations and, on a high level, were probably similar to what we saw from Barclays Africa the day before,” said Brad Preston, the chief investment officer for listed investments at Mergence Investment Managers. “Across all the banks things are quite muted in terms of headline earnings numbers.” What did stand out was that Nedbank showed an incredibly low credit loss ratio of 0.49%, down from 0.68% in 2017. “I think the credit numbers are just amazing,” said Preston, “but it does show how incredibly benign the credit environment is.”   Nedbank also showed very good cost containment, with costs growing just 5.1% for the year. It was also significant that while ROE was flat, the bank’s cost of equity trended down during the course of the year as the bond market strengthened. “We were able to keep ROE well ahead of our cost of equity,” Brown noted. “That’s what we would refer to as economic profit.” Ecobank Outside of South Africa, Nedbank did continue to feel the impact of 2016 losses suffered by Nigerian Ecobank Transnational Incorporated (ETI), in which it owns around 20%. It accounts for Ecobank’s performance one quarter in arrears, which is why they are still reflected in the latest results. Nedbank however believes that the outlook for ETI has improved. “I’m glad to say that ETI’s losses are expected to be behind us,” said Nedbank’s chief financial officer Raisibe Morathi. “When they came through it was on the back of some challenges in the Nigerian economy. That economy has improved, but ETI itself is also on a different path.” Analyst at 36ONE, Louis Kruger, is also cautiously optimistic. “With oil turning around the Nigerian economy looks a bit stronger and I feel a bit more comfortable around Ecobank,” he said. “I don’t think it will show the losses they it has in the past, at least, and if we get a good result that could be quite a big swing factor on Nedbank’s earnings.” Land expropriation Brown also emphasised that Nedbank continues to take the role it plays in society and delivering to all stakeholders, and not just shareholders. However, he acknowledged the challenge posed by Parliament’s recent decision on the expropriation of land without compensation. “We clearly understand the need for land reform,” he said. “The challenge is currently that no one knows how it will work. While we remain supportive of the agenda of parliament, we are unclear at this stage as to exactly what is meant by land expropriation without compensation that doesn’t harm the economy or food security. That is open to wide interpretation.” Brown did however believe that while over the longer term achieving sustained, inclusive growth in South Africa will require addressing “difficult structural elements” in the economy, the short-term benefits of improved confidence will support stronger performance at the bank. “As 2018 dawns with new political leadership in South Africa and renewed hope to address the economic challenges we face, I believe Nedbank is very well positioned to benefit from the improving economic environment,” he said. “This we think remains underpinned by the continuation of a synchronised global growth story, a cyclical upswing in South Africa and real possibility of structural reform.” Outlook Over 2018, the bank aims to grow diluted headline earnings per share by double digits. By 2020 it has set a target of achieving an 18% ROE, excluding goodwill. While this is a big improvement on last year, Kruger feels that the bank may be setting its sights too low. “They have guided towards GDP, plus inflation, plus 5% for earnings growth, but to me that doesn’t seem overly ambitious, given that ETI was such a big drag,” he says. “Even if ETI just goes flat they would already have 5% growth. If they get a bit of profit from ETI, then they are not setting a very high benchmark for the rest of the business.” However Preston feels it will be difficult for Nedbank to really shoot the lights out. “The big four banks are such a big part of the economy that it’s difficult to see any of them pulling away massively from GDP growth,” he says. “It’s kind of prudent for them not to be massively different.”