The long feud between growth and value equity investors can end. Both concepts are increasingly unhelpful with the shift from active investment to passive portfolios. As a result of this transition, growth and value are now broken approaches that have the potential to create significant and unnecessary risk for many investors. All-or-nothing methods of index construction create portfolios with dramatic over/under weights in volatile sectors. Single stock weightings can be double more broadly based indexes. Instead of helping investors diversify via traditional “style boxes,” growth and value now herd them into tightly fenced pens. Growth and value investing came of age during the mutual fund-driven rise of active management in the 1980s and 1990s. As a way for portfolio managers to differentiate and explain their investment styles, they were — and still are — very useful labels. However, as passive indexes — hard-coded rule sets with largely binary stock selection parameters — they have their problems. For example, growth/value classifications create dramatic and potentially risky sector concentrations versus broader market averages. Growth or value funds also push investors to take noticeably more single-stock risk than broader market averages. Simply using US small-cap measures such as the Russell 2000 Value or Growth indexes gets rid of the single stock overweight issue, but does little to ameliorate the sector concentration issue. Where all these differences become an important issue is in the world of US-listed exchange-traded funds. All this means there is a significant amount of equity-market capital invested in indexes that have very concentrated sector and stock holdings. It’s easy to see how this happened. Technology has dominated the growth stock narrative since the financial crisis due to the global nature of the internet and the product innovations that have leveraged that opportunity. Within that powerful investment theme, a handful of names has taken much of the overall economic and capital market gains. Over the last five years, which have been punctuated by declining volatility, this schism has been largely invisible. Equity ETF investors have actually added more to their value ETF holdings than to growth funds: $45.3 billion of inflows versus $23.9 billion. Given value’s underperformance over the period, that is a genuine testament to contrarian investing. The recent bout of market volatility has shaken that trend, however. Year-to-date, equity value funds have seen $3.0 billion of outflows while growth funds have enjoyed modest inflows of $286 million. To put those numbers into a greater context, overall US equity inflows totalled $6.1 billion in 2018. If volatility persists in 2018 — and I believe it will — this recent experience is telling. When you combine market-wide downdrafts with long-term historical underperformance, investors may not treat value stocks as a safer haven than their notionally more volatile growth cousins if market churn persists. This column does not necessarily reflect the opinion of the editorial board or Bloomberg LP and its owners. © 2018 Bloomberg