S&P Global Ratings has sounded an upbeat note on South Africa’s outlook, revising its domestic economic growth forecasts upwards due to government’s measures to return to fiscal consolidation. The rating agency, which has placed the local-currency rating on sub-investment grade or junk, expects economic growth to accelerate by 2% in 2018 and 2.1% in 2019 – much higher than government’s forecasts. The National Treasury has projected economic growth of 1.5% in 2018, 1.8% in 2019 and 2.1% in 2020. Although economic growth of 1.3% in 2017 exceeded government’s expectations, the pace of growth has been below 2% since 2014. Speaking at the S&P Global Annual Credit Seminar on Tuesday, the rating agency’s associate director Gardner Rusike, said growth in South Africa has largely been stunted by political infighting within the governing ANC. “This has impacted the work of government and the implementation of policies over many years. It has also increased the level of political uncertainty.” One of the key drivers in S&P revising its economic growth forecast is an improved 2018-19 national budget tabled in February 2018 compared with the mid-term budget in October 2017, which it described as a “bad scenario”. Rusike said S&P’s view was that government finances were in a much better place now than they were in October. At the time, former finance minister Malusi Gigaba revealed a shocking revenue shortfall of R50.8 billion and public debt that will exceed 60% of gross domestic product (GDP) by 2022. The hole in the nation’s finances would require the government to cut spending by a further R25 billion over the next three years. The major focus of the 2018-19 national budget was to stabilise government debt and to reduce the budget deficit over the next three years. Facing declining tax revenue, rising social demands on the fiscus and ballooning government debt, the National Treasury increased VAT to 15% from 14% – the first increase since 1993. The consolidated budget deficit is projected to narrow from 4.3% of GDP in 2017/18 to 3.5% in 2020/21, while government debt is projected to be 53.3% of GDP in 2017-18‚ rising to 55.1% in 2018-19‚ 55.3% in 2019-20 and 56% in 2020-21. Rusike said South Africa was on a good path, as the projected deficits were lower and would provide debt stabilisation in the near term. S&P’s views were also swayed by the recent change in political leadership, which appears to have halted the gradual erosion of the strength of South Africa’s institutions, renewed reforms to restore governance at state-owned enterprises and the purging of state capture linked government officials. Since Cyril Ramaphosa was elected as president in February 2018, the rand has strengthened by nearly 20% against the US dollar. Rusike said the positive rand exchange movements will likely be supportive of economic growth measures. However, a change in political transition does not necessarily mean that S&P will adjust its credit rating on South Africa’s local and foreign currency rating. In November, S&P Global joined Fitch Ratings in cutting SA’s local-currency rating from BBB- to BB+ (meaning sub-investment grade or junk). S&P’s next credit rating update is due on May 25. Rusike said lifting SA’s local-currency rating from junk territory would hinge on the independence of the Reserve Bank amid increasing calls for it to be nationalised and government’s prudence in sticking to its economic and policy reform measures. On Friday, Moody’s kept South Africa’s local- and foreign-currency rating at Baa3, the lowest investment-grade level, citing more transparent economic reform policies under Ramaphosa’s cabinet. Moody’s also revised the country’s outlook from negative to stable. Moody’s is the only rating agency that has not placed South Africa’s local-and-foreign currency in sub-investment grade, or junk status. A full downgrade of SA’s local-currency debt to junk would have led to an ejection from the investment grade-mandated indices including the Citigroup World Government Bond Index and Barclays Global Aggregate Index, and force a number of foreign investors to sell their local bond holdings.