Students and universities have expressed their concern and dismay after only a small percentage of students passed the Financial Planning Institute of Southern Africa’s (FPI’s) Professional Competency Examination (PCE). The PCE is one of the final hurdles financial advisors need to clear to obtain the internationally recognised Certified Financial Planner® or CFP® designation. Students need 60% to be regarded as “competent”– or pass the exam – but only 9% (34) of the 390 students who wrote the exam in February, got 60% or more. Seventeen percent of students passed the exam after condonation. There has been a significant drive to professionalise the financial planning industry in the interest of investors, and while higher barriers to entry for advisors should be welcomed, the results raise questions about whether all stakeholders are on the same page. Students obtain a post-graduate diploma in financial planning before writing the PCE, while many also have financial planning experience. University representatives did not want to comment on possible reasons for the low pass rate as an engagement and appeals process is still underway. Lee-Ann Steenkamp, head of the postgraduate diploma in financial planning at the University of Stellenbosch Business School, said she was “concerned and dismayed” about the low pass rate. “Although this is an FPI exam and the matter falls under their jurisdiction, I do believe this requires a collective response from academia, industry and the FPI alike. I respect the FPI and their examination process, and will continue to offer my assistance and support in whatever way they require it,” Steenkamp said. Shirly Hyland, director for the school for financial planning law at the University of the Free State, confirmed that she was concerned about the pass rate, “solely due to it being rather low and for no other reason”. One student, who spoke to Moneyweb on condition of anonymity, said there was significant unhappiness about the pass rate. The student, who obtained a 70%-plus mark for his postgraduate diploma, got just over 40% for the PCE, although he was well-prepared and didn’t feel that the exam paper was particularly difficult. Another student, who failed the exam before, and who improved his mark to about 50% in February, said there seemed to be something wrong with the system. The student, who has years of experience in the financial services industry and who passed the postgraduate diploma with an average mark of almost 70% in 2017, has decided not to write the PCE again, saying there was nothing more he could do to improve. “I am not the most intelligent person, but was definitely expecting to do better considering how I felt during the exam.” Lelané Bezuidenhout, CFP® and head of certification at the FPI, said the pass rate was lower than usual. Between 2014 and 2017 the average pass rate was 51%. “According to official feedback from our independent exam assessors and moderators, it is evident that a good number of candidates who sat this exam battled to translate their acquired knowledge to the real world financial planning scenarios that the FPI PCE tests.” Since the historical average pass rate was 51%, the FPI was not of the view that February’s low pass rate was a result of deficiencies in university programmes. “The education providers have been, and continue to be, invaluable in preparing the candidates for professional membership.” The FPI also provided free exam preparation workshops, exam preparation material and hosted an online interactive candidate forum to assist students, she added. Bezuidenhout said it was not unusual for candidates to be unhappy about their exam results if they were unsuccessful. The FPI Professional Competency Examination Policy provided guidelines on how to address such unhappiness and all candidates had a right to request a remark or lodge an appeal in line with this policy. Candidates also had a right to request viewing of their exam script together with the exam paper and suggested answers. Since the release of the results, a number of unsuccessful candidates exercised these rights and the FPI encouraged others to do the same. “Keeping the high demand for CFP® professionals in mind, the lower pass rate is of concern to us. We are however, comfortable that the results for this exam setting is a fair reflection on the performance of the individuals that wrote this exam. We will continue to work with the education and training providers, as well as candidates, to better prepare them for the PCE,” she added.