To launch our new series of articles on wealth management we started off with an exploration of “old style” regular savings as a way of creating wealth over the long term. We now shift our focus to wealth creation through business, careers, property and equity market investments (remembering that homes and holiday homes play second fiddle when it comes to wealth creation). Understanding the place of each of the above in your journey of wealth creation will set you up well for achieving your goals. Getting the mix right creates the “the real thing”, the ideal wealth creation formula. Here is our take on that recipe, based on our extensive observations and experience in wealth management. Your business As wealth advisors we’re not in a position to tell you how to conduct your business but we’ve certainly witnessed extremely successful business ventures over time, businesses which have led to the creation of significant wealth. A focused, concentrated approach to business, and gearing up for growth, are some of the main ingredients for business success. You may be a visionary inventor, a brilliant entrepreneur and have superior deal-making skills, and you may be wondering how to covert this into a valuable business. How do entrepreneurs do this? Quite simply: By owning shares in their own business, or shares in someone else’s business. Creating a successful enterprise in a growth industry, or breaking ground with new ideas and new technology, is the first step to creating a valuable business, a strong brand and becoming a dominant player in any industry. It’s the ownership of the business which creates value once the future earnings potential of the venture has been realised by the market. Your career Your career is your primary source of future wealth. A successful career in either business or a profession will reward you with significant income to invest for the future. Highly skilled people and specialist professionals are paid more due to the scarcity of their expertise. Invest in yourself, cultivate your skills and build your personal brand. Insure yourself against temporary or permanent incapacity. If it’s not your own business, owning shares in the company you work for can be very rewarding. This step creates capital alongside your normal income. Buying shares or accepting share options in a successful company, be it listed or unlisted, has yielded significant wealth for many. Local examples include companies in the mining, media, retail, financial and property sectors. Shares that come to mind are Naspers, Mr Price and Growthpoint. Hard work pays “You toil away for years and suddenly you are lucky. You scrimp and save and sacrifice and gosh, how wonderful to be touched by fate’s fickle finger!” – Richard Templar, The Rules of Wealth The odd stories of miraculous pathways to riches through selling a successful business idea for multiples of millions are few and far between. Many business ideas fall by the wayside and only a few survive the long, hard road to success. For the most part, the vast majority of wealthy entrepreneurs and professionals simply work their socks off. There is no substitute for hard work, diligence and patience. It takes many years to create a solid, successful business or a trustworthy personal brand. Intense involvement in your business or career holds the key to your primary source of wealth. The business of property Many a fortune has been made (and lost) in the property market by skilled property developers, deal makers and individuals simply acquiring commercial and residential property for their own account. The acquisition of property on a small scale to generate rental income requires your dedicated attention, as it is nothing more than a pure business. The benefit of investing in property is that it has the potential to increase your exposure with borrowed money. Gearing up on your investment properties is one way of getting ahead of the game, assuming that the market moves in your favour. Cycles of lower interest rates are the catalyst for property price increases and, with a bit of good fortune, you could see your investment surprise on the upside. Lifestyle assets Homes and holiday homes, a function of your success elsewhere, have proven to be a very handy source of wealth creation on a secondary level in the overall portfolios of wealthy people. While we have to apply prudence in using debt to finance these assets, we have witnessed significant value being created in some cases with these more “accessible” assets. People with a knack for property, gearing up, renovating and upscaling have gained ground in this field. But with property, the universal rule of “location, location, location” still dominates the outcome – certainly your fortunes will rise if you are able and savvy enough to buy in a highly sought-after area. Diversified assets: Your proprietary capital Investing for your own account is one of the fundamentals of wealth creation. Once your business venture or career finds traction and yields significant surplus income, it is essential to invest in a diversified portfolio of shares and listed real estate (traditional asset classes). Not only do you diversify away the risk of business failure, but it sets you up for an alternative source of wealth creation. This is where you use other people’s expertise and efforts to let your hard-earned money work for you. In this space, retirement funds offer the opportunity to diversify your wealth in a tax efficient way. Wealthy investors are also able to add a few alternatives to their portfolios. Hedge funds, artwork and gold coins come to mind ― asset classes that complement long-term wealth creation. The combo Miracles happen, but your chances of making a quick fortune are about as much as winning the lotto. Real wealth creation is the reward for a lifetime of hard work, honed business skills, and sensible investing. A successful career, investments in quality business assets, property, and other financial assets, combined with a decent chunk in your retirement fund, create a formidable combo for wealth creation – this is “the real thing”. Riaan Campbell is an advisory partner at Citadel. This article was first published on Citadel and is republished with permission. To access the original, please click here.