Steinhoff’s former chairman Christo Wiese had no idea that anything was wrong with the company’s accounting. He told parliament in January that the scandal around its financials “came like a bolt from the blue”. Read: A bolt from the blue At the company’s AGM in April, the entire supervisory board insisted that none of them knew about any accounting irregularities until they were ‘discovered’ in December. Whatever fraud had taken place, had happened without their knowledge. Former chief financial officer Ben la Grange told parliament last week that the first time he suspected something might be wrong was on December 2 last year when the company’s auditors flagged specific issues and asked for comment. Until then, he had no idea. Read: Steinhoff scandal: a three bucket wonder Then, on Wednesday, Steinhoff’s former CEO Markus Jooste told parliament that, as far as he was concerned, there was nothing wrong with the company’s financials. He said that when he resigned on December 6 last year: “I was not aware of any accounting irregularity in the books of Steinhoff”. Read: Jooste says he was not aware of accounting irregularities at the company Only two options This extraordinary lack of insight by every single person who should have known better leads to only two conclusions. The first is that some, or all, of them are lying. The second is that the version put forward by Jooste this week is true – that, in fact, there never was anything wrong with Steinhoff’s accounting. The former CEO told parliament that, as far as he was concerned, it was not the existence of fraud that led to the collapse of the company’s share price, but rather the auditors’ refusal to sign off on the financial statements. In his version, it was the insistence that there must be further investigation into alleged irregularities – and the fact that the annual results could not be released until this was completed – that caused the evaporation of investor confidence. Jooste told parliament that he resigned because he knew that this is what would happen if the results weren’t released. Credit would be cut, lenders would recall loans, and shareholders would run for the exits. The allegations of accounting irregularities had been around for years, and he believed that independent investigations had already found that there was nothing to them. He wanted the auditors replaced so that the results could be released and investor confidence restored. “I went through a two-and-a-half-year period dealing with the issues from the German tax investigation, the legal fights with [former joint venture partner Andreas] Seifert and the events that led up to the events in early December 2017,” he said. “My personal view was that the start of a brand new investigation on 5 December will not be completed quicker than two years … . I knew the company will be left in limbo with no financial figures and no investor confidence, and obviously pointing fingers at me as the CEO who could not complete and deliver the 2017 accounts.” When the board made the decision to implement a new investigation, he therefore didn’t feel that he could continue in his position. And, as he claims he had predicted, the share price plummeted. “The new investigation led to uncertainty and the inability to announce results,” he told parliament. “That led to the immediate fall of the price of the Steinhoff share.” The missing profits The difficulty with this version, however, is that the current Steinhoff board doesn’t seem to be in any doubt that there were accounting irregularities. At the AGM, the new CFO Philip Dieperink confirmed that the PwC forensic investigation had already: “confirmed a pattern of transactions undertaken over a number of years across a variety of asset classes that led to material overstatement of income and asset values of the group”. The scale of these overstatements was revealed in the unaudited financials for the six months to the end of March 2018. These included restated numbers for the 2017 period which showed that Steinhoff had inflated its operating profit by more than €1 billion (R18 billion), and that its total equity position was actually 65.8% lower than it had claimed. Read: The scale of the Steinhoff deception When, in the final minutes of Jooste’s appearance in parliament, Democratic Alliance MP David Maynier finally got to the crux of the issue and asked Jooste how he explained these restatements if, as he claimed, there was nothing wrong with the group’s accounting, the former CEO had no real answer. “I cannot comment on write-offs of values today that I was not aware of when I was still there,” Jooste said. “Once the information is published on what basis those assets were written off, I would be in a better position to reply.” This is not a minor misstatement or something within the realm of reasonable accounting error that he is referring to. He is talking here about the company of which he was the CEO overstating its operating profit by €1 billion. Accountability? What accountability? When the chairperson of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts, Themba Godi, closed the meeting, he noted that having now heard explanations from Wiese, La Grange and Jooste, the parliamentarians were really none the wiser in many ways. “You all worked for the same company, but your versions of what transpired are so divergent that one would assume you were working for different companies,” he lamented. He could have given them credit for at least agreeing on one thing: none of them knew anything. Listen to the interview with Themba Godi, chairperson of Parliaments Standing Committee on Public Accounts here: https://www.moneyweb.co.za/wp-admin/post.php?post=898960&action=edit