Talks about reconfiguring the alliance took priority over worker issues at the latest Cosatu congress, this in the face of an economy that is shedding jobs and adding workers to the ranks of the unemployed. In its preoccupation with its alliance partner relationships, Cosatu has exposed itself to further weakening. More so than usual, the politics of politics took centre stage at the expense of debating practical policy issues that will serve members. In the process, Cosatu, potentially so promising, is becoming the weakest link in the alliance. It has abandoned its strong position of speaking for the exploited working class and entered the arena of politics, where the terrain shifts depending on who is in charge. It is now wondering ‘why are they not adopting any of our policy proposals?’ and feeling bewildered that its attempts are not quite working. Politics have taken centre stage over workers’ issues. Politics of leadership within its affiliates, politics of the ANC and SACP, politics and more politics on differing political ideology. If you’re a trade union leader or even a Cosatu office-bearer, you may object placidly (you certainly couldn’t object furiously) when I say the favoured approach of ingraining the federation in the skirmish for access to and influence among the ANC elite has neither benefited the ordinary union member nor defeated capitalism. What is the rationale behind Cosatu remaining in the alliance today? Perhaps more than the previous ones, the 13th congress focused on dealing with internal challenges and considering its role in the alliance. The former was more inward-looking and encouraging, since it is indicative of an organisation that is taking step towards fixing weaknesses. The latter indicates that politics is regarded as more important than workers’ struggles. Waiting to see what the ANC will do The idea that a federation facing serious organisational challenges will look to the ANC as it reconfigures the alliance is baffling, and at the same time not. Surely it should be the other way around, where Cosatu looks at itself and reconfigures its own position within the alliance? This idea of waiting to see what the ANC will do about the alliance is both tragic and damaging to an organisation that has always claimed to be independent. Whatever the outcome of this reconfigured alliance, the interests of workers are not going to take priority over national economic reality. Not if the ANC wants to continue being the ruling party. There appears to be a belief within Cosatu that being in the alliance serves workers, but this is a fallacy. If anything, the last five years have seen the federation focus more on politics instead of being at the frontline in battles against unemployment and inequality. There hasn’t been a key policy from the ruling party that is aimed at better supporting Cosatu. Politics hogs the spotlight, keeping attention away from issues that affect the rank-and-file member across industries in the face of volatile work as the economy continues to slide deeper into recession. Besides the one historic moment – electing a woman as its president – there was hardly any forward-looking vision about the future of unions. Cosatu acknowledged its weakened status, with its political report referring to “the phenomena of business unionism, the growing distance from the rank and file, the creation of networks of patronage and these becoming decisive in determining leadership outcomes at congresses”. Even more telling is its view that the corruption, in-fighting and degeneration its affiliates are experiencing is contagion of “the corrosive malaise that is afflicting our broad movement, especially the ANC as a leading component and the most exposed to power and financial resources”. There may be some legitimacy in that assertion,and what remains is factional squabbling, disbanding of structures and last-minutes affiliate congresses in order to make to the national one. These are examples of small weaknesses that can snowball into avalanches as they’ve done in the ANC, leading to splinter groups emerging. It is the very preoccupation with politics that has led Cosatu to this point. The arena of politics has proved to be its undoing. Perhaps it time for Cosatu to step out of the alliance and stand alone. Factional bickering The amazing failure to understand that unless trade unions solve divisive internal and often factional bickering, they won’t be able to come up with policy suggestions that prioritise investments in support of a workable economy that is able to create quality jobs that pay a living wage while addressing the inequalities in society. Cosatu must now, more than in any other period in our democracy, demonstrate that the ‘back to basics’ theme of its 13th congress is more than mere words. To do that, its role in political ideology and the politics of the alliance will have to make way for real workers’ issues. This amid the reality that work has become more fragmented and automated. The new leadership must ensure that the federation anchors itself, first and foremost, on serving the members’ needs and challenges they encounter. Otherwise it will look on helplessly as its trade unions slide into irremediable decline, taking it down with them.