Steinhoff‘s former chief executive Markus Jooste was not aware of any accounting irregularities when he left the retailer in December, he told a South African parliamentary inquiry on Wednesday which is examining an accounting scandal that rocked the retailer. Jooste, is under fraud investigation by South African police and resigned in December after the company uncovered accounting irregularities. The scandal hit Steinhoff’s shares and left the company scrambling for working capital. In his first public testimony about the scandal, Jooste said he never lied about activities of the company and neither sold his shares in Steinhoff nor held a short position on its stock. He told the inquiry that he lost R3 billion ($193 million) due to the company’s stock price collapse after the scandal was uncovered. #Steinhoff Jooste’s family trust had 68m shares when the price collapsed; after being pressed, he says this resulted in a loss of R3 billion. — Gaye Davis (@Gaye_Davis) September 5, 2018 “I must place on record that when I left Steinhoff on the 4th of December, I was not aware of any accounting irregularities they are referring to,” Jooste said. “I don’t blame anybody for what happened at Steinhoff.” Jooste: when I resigned from #Steinhoff, I did not know about any accounting irregularities — raeesa pather (@raediology) September 5, 2018 Jooste later told a parliamentary inquiry his main mistake during his tenure as the retailer battled an accounting scandal was agreeing to a joint venture with Austrian businessman Andreas Seifert. Jooste said in his testimony that Steinhoff probably grew too quickly. #MarkusJooste: If I look back at the mistakes we made, we maybe grew too fast in too many countries and trusted too many associations. #Steinhoff — Ray Mahlaka (@RayMahlaka) September 5, 2018 In April, the retailer agreed to sell a 50% stake in German furniture chain POCO to Seifert, settling a German lawsuit over ownership of the business. Seifert claimed half-ownership of POCO, while Steinhoff said he had to be bought out due to unspecified actions by his company, Seifert Enterprises. #Steinhoff Jooste insisting “mistakes” referred to in post-quitting SMS to colleagues referred to partnership with Dr Andreas Seifert that went sour. Seifert prompted probe by German authorities that began in 2015. — Gaye Davis (@Gaye_Davis) September 5, 2018 Jooste was instrumental in transforming Steinhoff from a small Johannesburg furniture outfit into multinational retailer with more than 40 retail brands including Conforama in France, Poundland in the UK and Mattress Firm in the United States. Steinhoff’s battered shares rose at much as 5% as Jooste gave his testimony to the parliamentary committee. It traded 3.82% higher at R2.72 by 12:36 GMT. In July, creditors agreed to hold debt claims for three years, removing a imminent threat of default that would have tipped the company into bankruptcy. Steinhoff’s chairwoman Heather Sonn a week ago told the parliamentary committee that its board would meet to discuss asset sales to boost cash flow and pay down debt, months after creditors of the South African retailer threw it a lifeline. Steinhoff last week reported a 2% rise in sales to 12.9 billion euros ($15 billion) for the nine months to June 30 helped by a strong showing at its listed African unit Pepkor . Swift action After the hearing ended, Yunus Carrim, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Finance, the parliamentary committee hearing Jooste’s testimony, said its members felt that the former Steinhoff CEO could have been more forthcoming. “His account to parliament reinforces our call that the regulatory bodies and other state agencies should act swiftly and more decisively,” Carrim said. Carrim said the committee recognised the complex and global nature of corporate scandals such as Steinhoff’s and the huge amount of forensic and other investigative work needed to establish exactly what happened, but he said there should have been more progress 10 months after the Steinhoff scandal was uncovered. “More can and needs to be done,” said Carrim. He also said the panel wanted to see more cooperation between the relevant state agencies in South Africa and Germany, the Netherlands and elsewhere. Live updates: Scopa Chair Themba Godi says that Parliament has heard three different versions of events at #Steinhoff from Wiese, La Grange and Jooste. But Jooste’s account sheds light on the details about the dates, sequence of events and the people involved. @Fin24 @teamnews24 — lameez omarjee (@LameezOmarjee) September 5, 2018 #Jooste: I left Steinhoff because I knew that the company would be in shambles, because of its failure to publish financial statements. The auditing of a public company is a job of the audit committee, not the CEO. And I was satisfied with the audit function. #Steinhoff — ANC Parliament (@ANCParliament) September 5, 2018 #MarkusJooste‘s explanation for the enormous losses is simply “a sequence of events”. #Steinhoff — Marida Fitzpatrick (@MaridaFitz) September 5, 2018 #MarkusJooste: It saddens me what happened to #Steinhoff and losses to pensioners. The investors in the company invested in what they saw; they visited our operations internationally and factories. They didn’t look at the financial records. — Ray Mahlaka (@RayMahlaka) September 5, 2018 Jooste says he can comment on the value lost to pension funds- but that’s not why he’s at Parliament today. #Steinhoff @Fin24 @teamnews24 — lameez omarjee (@LameezOmarjee) September 5, 2018 #MarkusJooste on the letter he sent to #Steinhoff staff on Dec 5 saying he had made “big mistakes”: I was referring to the choice in 2007 of our strategic partner that failed and cost the company financial losses, caused drama and perception of accounting irregularities. — Ray Mahlaka (@RayMahlaka) September 5, 2018 #Steinhoff Jooste says he worked in Steinhoff since 28, and aspired to be like IKEA. The goal was to have a global furniture company. In the early 2000s it was realised that this cannot be done without a retailer. @BISouthAfrica — James de Villiers (@pejames) September 5, 2018