When Ascendis Health listed on the JSE in November 2013 it was quite the investor darling, rising from R11.10/share to a high of R28 in October 2016 as investors bought into the idea of a branded health and care company with portfolios that cover human, plant and animal needs. However successive acquisitions pushed debt up to R4.7 billion in 2017, with a net debt:Ebitda (earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortisation) ratio of 3.4x. The problem was that successive acquisitions added complexity, silos, and costs, without delivering real growth – in fact in 2015 and 2016 organic growth was flat to negative. March 2018 marked a turning point for the group. Notably, it was the low point for the share price, which hit R8.65 and has flatlined at about R10.77 since then. It also marked the resignation of the company’s founding CEO, Karsten Wellner. He was replaced by group COO Thomas Thomsen who immediately embarked upon a strategic review of the group’s operations. “There is no plan to divest from our core platforms, but we will divest from those companies we believe are not performing well under the current group structure or are non-core,” he told Moneyweb at the time. Stagnant organic growth was also under the spotlight. “When you have been as acquisitive as we have it is easy not to focus. Let’s pause for 12 months to regroup,” he said, promising further information in September. True to his promise, in the group’s results for the year to June 30th, organic growth showed signs of improvement. Ascendis reported group revenue that increased by 21% to R7.7 billion, with comparable revenue growth up by 5%. “We are not happy with this, but it is coming closer to our target of 7-10% organic growth,” he said on Tuesday. The company’s internationalisation efforts are paying off and international revenue increased by 35% to R3.7 billion, aided by the acquisitions of Remedica (2016) and Romanian-based Sun Wave Pharma (2017). International revenue now accounts for 48% of the group’s total sales. The group’s gross margin strengthened by 330 basis points to 44.8%, mainly due to the acquisitions of higher margin businesses Sun Wave Pharma, Cipla Vet and Cipla Agrimed in June 2017. In March 2018 the group acquired the animal health company Kyron Laboratories which boosted revenue and contributed to the improvement in gross margin. Normalised Ebitda increased by 18% to R1.3 billion. The Ebitda margin declined slightly to 17.3% due mainly to the increase in operating expenses and increased investment in the business. As promised Thomsen also provided additional details on the new strategy, which sees the Pharma and Consumer Healthcare business units being identified as the group’s new core focus areas. “These are the business units that are better positioned to scale up in a sustainable and predictable way,” he says. “The Medical and Animal Health divisions are more South Africa based and while core, will take a little longer to scale.” The four pillars of Ascendis Health Consumer brands Pharma Animal Health Medical Nimue Generics Efazol Plus The Scientific Group Solal, Vitaforce, JungleVites, Sunwave Pharma Farmalider (Spain) GCS Joint Care Surgical Innovations Scitec Nutrition Remedica (Cyprus) Ectoshield Ortho-Xact Source: Ascendishealth.com Strategic acquisitions that complement the core businesses will be considered. However Thomsen is clear that acquisitions will be more focused. “It is extremely hard to continue to grow with mergers and acquisitions; it can only be considered when you are crystal clear about your platform internally.” Geographic expansion will focus mainly on strengthening the group’s current foothold in Europe, the Middle East and Africa. The new strategic focus is targeted to generate annual organic revenue growth of 7-10% and Ebitda growth of 22-25% by the 2023 financial year. Thomsen said strategic non-core businesses are being divested to ensure greater focus on the core operations. Ascendis Health’s Biosciences business, which includes the Avima, Efekto, Marltons and Afrikelp brands, has been identified as non-core to Ascendis Health “and the logical next step is to divest from this business,” said Thomsen. “While this business is performing well, it serves different customers and requires capabilities and skills that are not core to Ascendis.” In the 2018 financial year, Biosciences contributed 12% of group revenue and 10% of earnings. In June 2018 Ascendis Health announced plans to divest three smaller local non-core businesses. Ascendis Sports Nutrition, which houses the five South African sports nutrition brands, has been sold for R54 million, and agreement has been reached for the sale of Ascendis Direct for R40 million. Ascendis is in the final stages of concluding an agreement for the sale of the group’s pharmaceutical manufacturing facility in Isando, Gauteng. The group’s sports nutrition strategy (within the Consumer division) will now focus solely on the biggest brand, Scitec. Hungary-based Scitec was acquired in 2016 and is one of the leading sports nutrition brands in Europe, however, it came under pressure from new competitors, many of which are online. To counter this, Ascendis has developed its own webstores and has partnered with Amazon to sell online in three markets. It was this clarity of focus that was lacking, says Thomsen. The directors have elected not to declare a final dividend and to retain the cash to settle debt obligations and improve gearing.