Green is the new black when it comes to structural and systems improvements in the home. Opting for eco-friendly interventions is no longer a question of preference but increasingly one of necessity. Climate change and the knock-on effects thereof have very real consequences for the planet. By making small adjustments to our homes we can do our bit in ensuring our carbon footprint on this precious planet is a little bit smaller. What’s more, choosing with the environment in mind tends to be the most cost-effective option in the long run. The initial capital outlay may be high but the compounded savings from more efficient systems, appliances and the like will eventually outweigh the start-up costs. Most of a home’s eco footprint is linked to its water and energy usage. By reducing and managing these two factors, a property almost immediately becomes greener and, by extension, more appealing for the modern, environmentally savvy home buyer. Right as rain These days water seems to be on everyone’s lips. That’s because South Africa is a dry country and we’re starting to feel the impact of changing weather patterns on our annual rainfall. We know now, more than ever before, that water is a precious but finite resource. “Reducing, reusing and recycling water at home needs to be one of our main priorities. Installing a water tank on your property is one way to save water. This water can then be used for watering the garden, washing cars or even flushing toilets. Where possible, opt for a more sophisticated system that allows water to run off from the roof and gutters into the tank, rather than just having a tank that it needs to be rained into. The number of rainwater tanks you install depends on your budget and how much greywater your household can realistically use. There’s no point in having eight water tanks that fill up and overflow in the rainy season, without a plan for using that water timeously. High five for low flow Low flow is the way to go when it comes to the toilet and the shower. Research has proven that low-flow shower heads use up to 50% less water than ordinary ones. Similarly, a low-flow toilet uses less than 5 litres of water per flush, whereas a toilet that doesn’t have the low-flow system can use up to 26 litres of water per flush. Make energy while the sun shines In South Africa we enjoy an average of 2 400 hours of sunshine a year. When you consider there are only 8 760 hours in a year, that amounts to more than a third of the year. That’s a lot of sunshine and a great reason for investing in solar panels for your home. Think about it like this; solar energy is the most renewable energy resource we have at our disposal and it’s free, provided we have the means to process it. While the cost of installing solar panels, and the associated setup, can seem prohibitive at the outset, experts reckon that the cost of installation can be recovered in as little as three years. What’s more, it’s estimated that you save up to 60% on your monthly electricity bill right from the start. Interestingly, solar panels also require very little maintenance, which is another reason to seriously consider solar. How does your garden grow? With all the sunshine we enjoy in South Africa, outdoor living is an important part of our lifestyle, and a lush garden is often central to enjoying the outdoors. Gardens are great, but can be very water intensive. The solution is to plant indigenous as far as possible. Indigenous plants by their very nature are suited to our warmer climate and typically need far less water than plants and trees that have had to adapt to growing here. Indigenous plants won’t just survive, they’ll thrive, and they don’t need megalitres of water to do so. Ask your local nursery about the best species to plant if you are unsure.