If all your financial advisor is doing is giving you financial advice, they are not doing their job. When it comes to the highly complex and stressful issue of retirement in particular, the role of the financial advisor has shifted. For their financial planning to have any meaning, it has to be accompanied by a more thorough appreciation of what you actually intend doing with your life. A new journey In general, most financial advice focuses on the build-up to retirement and the actual moment at which a person stops working and needs to generate an income from what they have saved. That is, however, often seen as an end point. It’s a goal that has been reached, and little is done to address the many years that may follow after that. Frank Richards, head of Momentum FundsAtWork, says this issue is compounded by the fact that people are now living longer. Living to 100 is no longer an extreme. In other words, people could live another 40 years – or more – after their official retirement date. Given that one only expects to work for around 40 years, this means there is another entire investment journey that an individual needs to be guided along. “Longevity really is one of the biggest challenges in the industry today,” Richards told the South African Independent Financial Advisors Association (SAIFAA) seminar this week. “People are living much longer and we need to understand what the implications of that are. The way in which we design investment products needs to be different. The way we interact with our clients has to be affected by these challenges.” Dealing with the financial issues first What makes this even more relevant is that the financial choices one has to make in retirement are usually more complex than those made before that point. “From an investment perspective, you can build a portfolio that is appropriate for most people,” says Richards. “But when it comes to annuity strategies in retirement, people are very different. It’s more complicated to construct something to suit an individual profile.” This is for two primary reasons. The first is that most people have not saved enough, and that inevitably means that compromises have to be made. The second is that there are so many different types of annuities that choosing between them is a highly complex exercise. “It’s daunting, and it’s so technical,” he acknowledges. “There is so much to take into consideration.” More than just the money In order to make appropriate decisions, advisors should see this as far more than just a once-off decision. That is because retirement is increasingly being understood as a process. Psychologist Hannetjie Van Zyl-Edeling told the seminar that advisors need to start thinking about retirement in a completely different way in order to really help their clients to not just adjust, but thrive once they leave full-time employment. “We need to facilitate a smooth transition. In my practice I often see people who have waited too long. It happened to a friend recently. He retired, but continued to work on a contact basis, but then suddenly the contract work stopped. His entire life imploded. He is so depressed that he can’t even drive his own car at the moment.” This highlights how retirement isn’t just a financial event. In order to help their clients make good decisions, advisors need to look not just at what money is available, but how they are going to use it. Planning on other levels Van Zyl-Edeling says there are three important aspects that advisors have to consider in addition to the financial portfolio. She calls them the psychological, social and health portfolios. “For many people, when they change from a full-time work situation to an absence of that, there is total loss of identity and meaning. We need to assist them in a long-term planning way, where they work on a new identity.” It may not be for the advisor to provide psychological counselling to a client, but it is important that these questions are at least addressed. A financial plan cannot happen in isolation without understanding what a client’s future life is going to look like. To illustrate her point, Van Zyl-Edeling uses the metaphor of a lighthouse. “If you were shipwrecked and didn’t know where the land was, it would be incredibly difficult to decide where to go.“However, if you see the lighthouse, you can cut out a massive range of unnecessary activities and focus on that place. It gives you something to aim for. “Set a lighthouse and plan that journey very carefully,” she says. “Focus on where you need to go.”