Here’s what caught our attention on Friday: 1.Economic events M3 Money supply for August increased to R350.9 billion, compared with the R344.6 billion recorded in July, data showed on Friday. The August data for South Africa’s balance of trade is also expected to be released on Friday. In July, the trade balance shifted to R4.66 billion deficit, from a downwardly revised R11.89 billion surplus in June. Update to follow. 2.August credit growth increases South Africa’s private sector credit for August rises to 6.74% from 5.41% in July, data from the central bank showed on Friday. 3.Life Healthcare trading update Private hospital operator, Life Healthcare issued a trading statement for the year ending September 30, 2018, in which it says it expects revenue to grow between 10% and 14% and expects normalised Ebitda to grow between  8% and 10% for the period. The company says performance in the Southern African operations recovered with positive volume growth compared with the previous year. Life Healthcare also announced last week that it will be exiting the Indian market after selling 49.7% of its stake in Max Healthcare. Read: Life Healthcare not ruling out return to India after Max disposal 4.Bathabile Dlamini found liable for legal costs It’s not her game anymore. Former minister of Social Developments, Bathabile Dlamini is now personally liable for legal costs and for her role in the Sassa fiasco, the Constitutional Court ruled on Thursday. Dlamini will have to pay 20% of the legal costs from her own pocket. Meanwhile, pressure is mounting on the President to remove Dlamini from his cabinet. Dlamini currently holds the position of Minister of Women in the presidency. Read: Why the Bathabile Dlamini legal cost ruling is significant 5.Petrol hikes- not a joke this time September’s fuel hike was bypassed, that saved us some bucks. October on the other hand, is set to surprise us all. The Automobile Association is saying that the upcoming fuel hike will be one of the highest that South Africa has ever experienced, in their words, it will be ‘catastrophic’. All will be revealed next week, for now, sit tight and save big time.