Here’s what caught our attention on Tuesday: 1. Q3 consumer confidence South Africa’s consumer confidence for the third quarter of 2018 will be released on Tuesday. In the second quarter, consumer confidence decreased to 22 index points from 26 index points in the first quarter, data from Trading Economics shows. Update to follow. 2. Naspers announces changes to business Multi-national media and e-commerce company Naspers announced on Monday plans to unbundle and separately list its pay TV unit, MultiChoice. Naspers says the move comes in light of the growing popularity of online streaming services. The new company will be named MultiChoice Group and will be listing on the JSE in 2019. Read: MultiChoice to list on the JSE as Naspers eyes pay-TV exit Furthermore, Moneyweb is reporting Naspers made an early morning announcement on Tuesday, stating its decision to purchase WeBuyCars for R1.4 billion. Read: Naspers puts pedal to the metal 3. Proposed merger between Sibanye and Lonmin The Competition Commission has approved the proposed merger between mining companies, Sibanye-Stillwater and Lonmin. It, however, proposed conditions on the venture, saying that although it does not necessarily prevent or lessen competition in the PGM industry, it does surface some public interest concerns. According to Reuters, Sibanye needs to retain Lonmin’s employees, contracts with suppliers and its black ownership deal. 4. Discovery Vitality’s new gig Ever looked at all those cool kids with Vitality points, getting free smoothies, coffees and cheaper airfares? Well, now Discovery is offering this ‘life’ to everyone, by opening its Vitality benefits to all in its new advertising campaign. The campaign runs for the next 10 weeks. Read the full story here. 5. Growthpoint under scrutiny Listed property company, Growthpoint has come under scrutiny for its inflated income and dividend growth. In a Moneyweb exclusive, it is being reported that SBG Securities found that Growthpoint generated about R145 million in income from non-recurring sources during the 2018 financial year, which the company then used to deliver a 6.5% growth in dividends.