Amazon.com unveiled a new $50 Echo Dot with an improved speaker, one of the first devices unveiled in a product show designed to keep pushing smarthome gadgets during the busy holiday shopping season. The new speaker has 70% better sound, Amazon’s senior vice president of Alexa devices, David Limp, said at a media event Thursday. The Echo Dot is one of Amazon’s best-selling devices, he said. The product is available for order today and will begin shipping next month. Amazon also introduced a subwoofer to go along with existing Echo products as well as a pair of amplifiers that work like audio control centers for the home. The Seattle internet giant keeps introducing devices and features to make its Alexa voice-activated platform more prominent in customers’ lives. Chief Executive Officer Jeff Bezos sees voice as the next interface connecting people and machines, like a mouse on personal computers and touchscreens on smartphones. Global spending on smarthome devices such as speakers, thermostats and lights will hit $96 billion this year thanks to new gadgets from companies like Amazon, Alphabet Inc.’s Google, ADT Inc. and Samsung Electronics Co., and falling prices, according to Strategy Analytics. About 40 percent of the spending will be in North America, Amazon’s primary market. Amazon introduced the Echo voice-activated speaker in 2014 and has maintained a lead over tech competitors Google and Apple Inc. Amazon and Google flooded the market with low-cost devices like the Echo Dot and Google Home Mini, letting shoppers try voice tech at home for as little as $25. About two-thirds of smart speaker users in the U.S. will use an Amazon Echo this year, compared to less than 30 percent who will use a Google Home, according to EMarketer Inc. Digital assistants are not used much for shopping, but they have gone mainstream. More than 70% of US consumers use voice-activated technology on a daily basis. Getting GPS directions and weather forecasts are among the most popular requests, according to a survey released Wednesday by AppDynamics.