Here’s what caught our attention on Wednesday: 1. Markus Jooste has his day in parliament The former CEO of Steinhoff, Markus Jooste, who is being blamed for Steinhoff’s collapse is making his way to parliament on Wednesday. This will be Jooste’s first public appearance since the scandal. Jooste told reporters last week that he will only be discussing flaws in the finance industry, and not at Steinhoff specifically. Meanwhile Bloomberg is reporting that the Hawks and Steinhoff are at an impasse regarding details of an investigation that is currently underway. But let’s wait to see how the day unfolds. 2. Standard Bank PMI The Standard Bank purchasing manufacturing index for August is expected to be released on Wednesday. In July, the Standard Bank PMI fell to 49.3 from 50.9 in June. Update to follow. 3. MMI Holdings results Financial services provider, MMI says operational shortcomings in the 12 months ended June 30, 2018 led to a disappointing set of results. Diluted core headline earnings fell 12% to R2.8 billion or to 176 cents per share, while diluted headline earnings were R1.3 million less than diluted core headline earnings. No interim dividend has been declared for the period. 4. Plans for Discovery bank The news of Discovery launching a bank has been making its rounds. On Tuesday, during the release of its financial results, Discovery announced that it would be paying FirstRand Investment Holdings R1.8 billion to exit its Discovery Card joint venture. Additionally Discovery will acquire FirstRand’s effective interest, economic interest and all the rights to the Discovery Card book, as well as related assets. Discovery will also be launching its bank in the fourth quarter of 2018. Read: Discovery to pay FirstRand R1.8bn to exit credit card JV 5. DRDGold results DRDGold will be releasing its financial results for the year ended June 30, 2018 on Wednesday. In a trading statement issued last week, the company says it expects headline earnings per share to increase between 1.53 cents and 1.87 cents as a result of an increase in gold production. Earnings per share is expected to increase between 1.18 cents and 1.82 cents, a decrease of between 63% to 43%, respectively. Update to follow.