An unrepentant former Steinhoff CEO Markus Jooste joined a string of individuals associated with the ruined company standing before parliament professing innocence and lack of complicity and knowledge of fraud and accounting irregularities. Even his confessional message to staff as he left the group in December, admitting big mistakes and saying he would face the consequences, was framed as one where he apologised only for his “failure to pick a reliable strategic partner”. This refers to getting into business with joint venture partner Andreas Seifert, who Jooste says caused at least two years of time and trouble in investigations into Steinhoff’s affairs, which found absolutely nothing untoward. Jooste, speaking for the first time since the December 6 collapse of Steinhoff after a subpoena was served on him, added his voice to what appears to be a comprehensive list of people associated with Steinhoff. This includes former chairman Christo Wiese, suspended CFO Ben La Grange and past board member and current chair Heather Sonn, who have already appeared before parliament. Jooste, who appeared with a legal team of four, said numerous times that it was the decision to get involved with the strategic partner and the souring of their relationship that he admits to, but little else, apart from growing the company too quickly in too many countries and “relying on trust” – referring to Seifert. He also put a large part of the blame on auditor Deloitte, which, through its insistence on calling for a new investigation and refusing to sign off on accounts late last year, caused the loss of investor confidence and subsequent decline in the share price. He also indirectly disputed earlier testimony by Wiese, saying both Wiese and head of the audit committee Steve Booysen had prior knowledge of issues Steinhoff was facing in November – at least a month before they claimed, adding that Wiese was “closely involved” in discussions with Deloitte during November. Jooste said he and Wiese shared the view, on December 4, that a further investigation which Deloitte called for, would be “ridiculous” and delay finalisation of the financial statements indefinitely and put the group “in dire consequences” in terms of cash flow, its position with lenders and investor confidence. Jooste believed, instead, that Deloitte’s mandate should be terminated, alternative auditors appointed, and unaudited results released. He said that he realised the failure by the company to release financial information as expected on December 6 as a result of the auditors refusing to sign off, as well as allegations of any irregularities, would have a disastrous effect; credit lines would have been suspended, investor confidence in the group would be lost and lenders would lose faith. He said that he made it clear that if his suggestions were not in line with the board’s view, he would not stay at the group, hence his December 6 exit. He denied any claims of off balance sheet entities, profit inflation and bullying analysts who produced negative reports. Further to that, Jooste said he was not in a position to comment on anything specific to Steinhoff as, because he has left, he has no files or his computer, and no access to information. Like the others who have appeared before parliament, he outlined how the group was complex, spread across Europe, Africa and the US with each having a controlling company, board, audit committee and internal and external auditors in 30 jurisdictions subject to laws and accounting regulations, which were not necessarily the same. He spoke about Seifert, who “turned out was the wrong person to go into business with” and how his termination of the association in March 2015 resulted in various litigations and the investigation by German tax authorities. It was his view that Seifert was attempting to use prosecutors and the press, “to obtain information and influence the outcome of the courts”. The Steinhoff board appointed two law and accounting firms to investigate and they found nothing. In September, a Deloitte partner in the Netherlands sent an email to Jooste, La Grange, Deloitte SA and Steinhoff Europe’s CFO saying information had been received regarding the German tax investigation, and referred to reports of possible accounting irregularities and sought comment and additional audit procedures. A later Deloitte letter to Booysen referred to allegations relating to tax, potential incorrect application of accounting principles and related party transactions. Booysen and Jooste replied saying the allegations were not new and represented Seifert’s unfounded attempts to influence litigation. Deloitte said on November 23 that a new investigation should be launched, and on the 29th of that month, Jooste was informed this investigation was no longer necessary, but, according to him, Deloitte did an about turn the next day. Jooste said that by the time he left, 90% of his time as CEO was dedicated to dealing with reports and concerns and he had “had enough”. “I am not blaming anybody,” Jooste told parliament, and he wanted “to place on record that I was not aware of any accounting irregularity in the books of Steinhoff”. Read: Jooste says he was not aware of accounting irregularities at the company Chair of the standing committee on Finance Yunus Carrim told Jooste he was coming across “as the Mother Theresa of Steinhoff”, without showing “an inkling of regret or sliver of acknowledgement of the severe gravity of what happened here.” Jooste remained steadfast. He would only admit that he felt “totally responsible” only for choosing the wrong partner and going “into territories we shouldn’t have”.