According to statistics from Morningstar there were 176 funds in the South Africa equity general category at the end of August. Given that there are 375 companies listed on the JSE, that means there are now almost half as many local equity funds as there are shares. One of the benefits of unit trusts is that they are meant to make investing easier. Instead of selecting individual shares, investors can engage a professional asset manager to do that for them. However, if there are so many funds available, choosing an asset manager is becoming almost as complicated as picking stocks. The difference in returns one can experience are also substantial. As the table below shows, the difference in performance between the top performing general equity fund and the poorest performer over the last year is 37.28%. Source: Morningstar What makes this disparity even more confusing for investors is that, on face value, both the Sygnia Divi Index Fund and the Investec Value Fund follow value-investing strategies. Ordinarily, one would expect them to perform in similar ways. For 2014, 2015 and 2016, this was broadly the case. As the below table shows, both funds delivered market-related performance in 2014, underperformed substantially in 2015, and rebounded in 2016. However, their fortunes have diverged materially since the start of 2017. Source: Morningstar Looking at this, how does one answer the question of whether value investing is performing or not? How can the same broad philosophy deliver such different results? Some might argue that as a passive fund tracking an index that only takes a single factor – dividend yield – into account, the Sygnia Divi Index Fund is not truly representative of value investing. That requires a manager making active decisions about where value is available in the market. However, if one looks at the year-to-date returns for local equity funds, one runs into another anomaly. The Investec Value Fund is again the worst performer, while the Counterpoint SCI Value Fund is eighth and the SIM Value Fund is also in the top 15. Source: Morningstar These are all funds explicitly following an active value strategy, yet producing completely different results. How does the industry explain that to the average investor? Are they genuinely all value funds, or do they just carry the name for marketing purposes? The largest holding in the SIM Value Fund is Naspers. The fund managers might have a good argument for why they believe Naspers is a value stock, but many market watchers would raise their eyebrows at the idea that a counter trading on a price-to-earnings ratio of nearly 60 could be considered value. This illustrates the complexity that investors are facing. Even if one narrows the universe of equity funds down to the handful that can be clearly classified as value funds, one still faces a far from simple task in choosing between them. This is unquestionably one of the reasons why investors all over the world have been moving more and more of their money into index funds. And it’s not a reason that the active management industry seems to entirely appreciate. Recently the head of business development at a local fund manager wrote an article in which he argued that no passive fund outperforms the index it is tracking due to the fees it has to deduct. This, he said, means that “the investment outcome is guaranteed to disappoint”. This, however, is a misunderstanding of why passive funds have become so popular. In fact, one could argue that index trackers are guaranteed not to disappoint, since they deliver performance in line with the market. What investors really find disappointing is the inconsistent returns from active managers. No fund manager can guarantee outperformance year after year, and none deliver it. A market-related return is something investors can understand. They can live with why their investment is going up or down because they can see the market doing the same thing. Active managers have known this for decades, which is why many of them have run funds that are closet index trackers. Of course good fund managers will outperform over the long term, and there are many good fund managers in South Africa. However, to beat the index you have to take positions different to the index, and that guarantees the risk of underperformance. It also guarantees an additional layer of complexity for the investor, since the reasons why a fund does well or poorly are not always explicit. Of course passive investing is no panacea. It does come with its own risks. However, it does substantially reduce the complexity that investors have to deal with. And since active managers have been the architects of this complexity in the first place, they are now facing the consequences.