Disappointing economic growth and a weaker rand (since its high of about R11.55 to the US dollar in late February) have given South Africans a sharp reality check, demonstrating that while Cyril Ramaphosa’s presidency may have initially revitalised the country’s sense of optimism, deep-seated structural economic challenges remain. Investors assessing the country’s progress over the coming months should ignore the political noise and instead look to the key metrics to judge government’s effectiveness. For instance, President Ramaphosa’s biggest achievements since winning the ANC National Elective Conference last year have been getting elected as president, placing competent leaders into crucial positions and restoring confidence to some extent in government. However, very little has changed. Ramaphosa has addressed the low-hanging fruit, but without the hard data to support optimism, while business and consumer confidence will see a further correction, especially as Vat and fuel price increases will leave less money in consumers’ pockets. Ramaphosa needs to seize the opportunity to get South Africa’s house in order while the global economic environment is still supportive. South Africa by the numbers The country’s scorecard paints a grim picture, particularly in the areas of unemployment, inequality and poverty. Firstly, in a population of 57.7 million people, the official unemployment rate remains at 27.2% – an especially frightening number when compared to emerging market peers such as Brazil (12.3%), India (3.5%), China (3.9%), Russia(4.7%) and Mexico (3.5%). Of greater concern, however, is the unemployment rate for those aged between 15 and 34 – an overwhelming 53.7%, which means greater potential for civil unrest and crime. The World Bank ranks South Africa as one of the most unequal societies in the world – with 50% of the poorest households currently earning only 8% of total household income, while 10% of the wealthiest account for about 55%. In assessing the country’s overall prosperity and wealth, it is worth noting that South Africans’ average income per person has been decreasing since 2014, with average economic growth of just 1.1% per annum over that period having been consistently outpaced by population growth of about 1.6% a year. South Africa is not a rich country by global standards, and the cake has been shrinking over the past four years while the global economy has achieved growth of around 3.5%. To steer South Africa back onto the path of economic recovery, government now needs to recommit to pulling the right levers, or the ‘Four Ps’ – people, plan, policy and proper implementation. Ramaphosa’s priorities for the rest of 2018 We’ve already seen some progress with regards to the first two Ps. This began by placing the right people in the right places – the appointment of respected figures such as Nhlanhla Nene, Pravin Gordhan and Gwede Mantashe to key economic positions. There have also been improvements in governance at state-owned enterprises (SOEs, with changes to the boards at Eskom, Denel, Transnet and SAA. In terms of the second lever – plan – we have the National Development Plan, which charts government’s course for solving South Africa’s economic challenges, as well as former finance minister Malusi Gigaba’s 14-point plan of action introduced in 2017 to revive the economy. The real work now needs to be done on delivering policy certainty and stability. While policies need to be approached carefully and thoughtfully, the speed and the effectiveness of policy decisions made from this point will determine the speed of the country’s economic turnaround. Issues that specifically need to be addressed include the Mining Charter, property rights and land expropriation without compensation. We also need to see government encouraging more public and private partnerships, with success already seen in areas such as renewable energy and student housing. Once the right policies are in place, we will need to wait for proper implementation. National, provincial and local government need to be free of corruption and focused on the task at hand. If these policies are addressed and properly implemented, we could still see economic growth of between 1% and 2% next year, and perhaps even 3% or 4% per annum within the next five to 10 years. Yolanda Naudé is head of fund research and portfolio manager at Citadel.