The past few weeks have certainly given columnists enough material to keep their keyboards busy: recession, rand in free fall, state capture, and perhaps most important of all, the 10th anniversary of the onset of the great recession. The latter received scant attention yet far outranks any of the parochial issues we and other countries have to deal with. Has the global economy really come to grips with the issues that plunged it into widespread panic on September 15, 2008? Or are the dark clouds still looming, ready to unleash an economic cyclone at any moment? All of that for a future column. I turn this week rather to an intensely personal event that made me confront the futility of obsessing with these seemingly weighty things. It also explains my absence from this column these past few weeks. It may not be the most appropriate topic, but overwhelming personal experiences often give insights into the human condition – revealing the things that make us noble or contemptible, the way things should and could be, and those powerful forces locked in each individual but suppressed by the mundane and socioeconomic conditioning. In our zeal to be competitive, ambitious, robust and materially successful, we suppress and even discourage the finer attributes that make us truly human. Paradoxically, these are the very qualities that are essential to our survival as a species. One such quality is compassion, and recently I got only the smallest taste of its power to change one’s very being, if only for a moment. A few months ago, I received a call from the daughter of my life partner and companion for the past dozen or so years. “Jerry”, she said, “my mom is dying”. Yvonne had undergone a number of tests in hospital and was sent home with the prognosis that her vital organs were ‘shutting down’. She was given some three days left to live. And so begins a dance with death. You hold her hand and whisper forgettable endearing platitudes as you are drawn into that moment, becoming mesmerised by the music but not quite a participant in the dance. As you fall deeper into a trance way beyond empathy, you become one with both her and her plight. You discover what living in the moment really means. It’s that state where everything else is forgotten, where no trivia or even other bigger concerns can enter. It’s a state where sad serenity shields you even against grief and where you become aware of the perfection of the moment and the huge promise of being able to live in it constantly. A few days beyond the three, she started to disengage from the dance, despite the music playing on. Some days later, the music itself started to recede to muted tones in the distance. She could not quite recall what drove her from the dance floor, apart from a concern for the suffering of those around her. Compassion had brought us to that state. Compassion had taken us out of it. Sufficiently strong to defy death itself. We can still hear the pipes calling from far away. May they never be silenced as a reminder of what our humanity is capable of and the things that are really important in life. I have often written about the power of empathy and caring for others as a socioeconomic force and its capacity to foster success even in practical ways. In countless workshops, I had teams play a business game in which they had to build a model for the facilitator as the customer (see video here). They invariably got the model wrong, simply because, on delivery, wrapped up in their own egos and competitiveness, they failed to ask the customer what was wrong with it. The simple lesson was that if they cared enough, they would have asked, and immediately they would have escaped the things that keep them small – narrow assumptions, ignorance and insecurity. Still today, I marvel at how people are trapped in the narrow confines of petty self-interest, unable to look beyond that and grow from understanding others. Within a day of each other, there were two television appearances that starkly revealed that difference: the disempowering self-focus and the empowering external focus. When a dry-mouthed Markus Jooste had to defend his role in the Steinhoff collapse, he appeared defensive, weak, and insecure. The next day, SA Post Office CEO Mark Barnes was animated, excited and joyful when he appeared on a news show to give feedback on his personal visit to social grant payout sites and the improvements he could bring about immediately, such as seating for the elderly and ensuring that the terminals remained open until all had been served. True, much still has to be done to improve the mail service itself and the financial state of the SOE. Here Barnes may benefit if he listens to Microsoft’s Bill Gates’s suggestion: “What I do best is share my enthusiasm”. We all have so much power locked within us, and so much greater potential at an individual, collective and country level. All we have to do is change our mirrors into windows.