Sasfin’s multi-year strategy to grow the “global wealth” of its clients is bearing fruit with the specialist banking group hitting a milestone in offshore assets under management and reporting significant growth in foreign income. The group’s offshore assets under management topped R10 billion during the year ended June 30, 2018. This is a noteworthy milestone given that it only seriously began taking funds offshore in 2011, according to David Shapiro, Sasfin Securities deputy chairman. It also reported a 32% increase in foreign income, largely driven by inflows into its managed offshore portfolios and the Sasfin BCI Global Equity Fund. This in turn boosted the performance of its wealth division, where earnings more than doubled to R30.52 billion, which proved to be bright spot amid disappointing results from the group’s banking and capital pillars. Read: Moral corruption in private sector a concern – Sasfin A considerable portion of the offshore funds under management flow from high net worth individuals (HNWIs) – serviced by Sasfin’s Private Clients business – who are close to retirement age or have already retired, says Erol Zeki, chief executive of Sasfin Wealth. The fact that it reached the R10-billion milestone during a period marred by weak business confidence and negative investor sentiment isn’t reflective of a scramble to get money out of the country, he adds. “This isn’t something that happened in the last year. This has been a strategy of ours for four to five years, where we’ve been consistently helping our clients to take a more global approach investment. It wasn’t necessarily a scramble to take money offshore during the year, but I do think that the currency strength during ‘Ramaphoria’ did give people an opportunity – and we certainly did see people taking advantage of the stronger rand – to externalise more money. It has been more of an ongoing consistent approach to investing [rather than a scramble].” Zeki adds that the group’s strategic focus on building off-shore assets and growing foreign income does not come at the expense of investing in South Africa, as portfolios include some JSE and local listed instruments. “It is a real win-win. It is a win for our clients because they are now getting true global diversification and hedging themselves against emerging markets and South African risk. It remains important for clients to retain a healthy exposure to South Africa, where they live and are going to retire. We’re not saying that they must take everything out but that they need to take a much more balanced view from an investment perspective.” Shapiro explains that the search for offshore returns comes from wanting to both build and protect their clients’ wealth: over the last five years, the S&P has outperformed the JSE by around 75% in dollar terms, while there is a 36% difference in the performance of Sygnia’s US tracker and the JSE in rand terms. He adds that, based on a ‘universe of stocks’, all portfolios are tailored toward the needs of individual clients. “When a client comes to me, I say ‘My job is very simple, all I do is buy you the best 15, 20 or 25 [depending on the size of the portfolio] shares in the world’.” Shapiro says it was most difficult to sell the strategy when it was at its most attractive some six years ago when JSE returns were attractive, but that sudden big losses from the likes of Steinhoff, Aspen, Mediclinic and MTN are motivating clients to look outside of South Africa for opportunities. Zeki says the recent acquisition of digital wealth advice platform SIPP Investments (now Sasfin Wealth Investment Platform) and a strategic stake in Saxo Capital Markets South Africa (a platform that facilitates global trade and offshore investment) will allow the group to continue growing offshore income and attract a more diverse client mix.