Urban professionals, whether they live in Lagos, Johannesburg, Nairobi, Cape Town or Luanda, are often more similar than different. They work hard, play hard, and are brand conscious and aspirational. These are the people that fine liquor merchant Truman & Orange is targeting. Truman is a new company on the liquor scene and is aiming to provide consumers with more interesting alternatives to the ubiquitous mega-brands that monopolise shelves in South African and regional shops and bars. In the process, it will compete directly with giants like Diageo, Pernod Ricard and Bacardí. The company was formed by Rowan Leibbrandt, who spotted the opportunity to market quality spirits on the continent while promoting Pernod Ricard brands in the EMEA (Europe, the Middle East and Africa). “It was so obvious there was a gigantic opportunity. It was not a case of do you participate? It was more a case of how do you participate?” Mark Bowman, the former MD of SABMiller Africa, has taken an undisclosed equity stake in the company and is providing strategic input on a part-time basis. Bowman joined SAB in 1993 and was appointed MD of SABMiller Africa in 2007. He knows the sub-Saharan market intimately and was widely credited with forging the strong relationships necessary to drive SAB’s growth across Africa. These were with various governments as well as French family-owned beer group Castel, with whom SAB had, and still has, a strong partnership. At a time when SA firms are more focused on markets beyond Africa, Leibbrandt and Bowman are convinced Africa is the place to be. That is despite the fact that Africa’s demographic dividend is still largely unrealised. However, Leibbrandt notes that of the 10 fastest growing global economies, African countries occupy six of the slots (according to the World Bank). The list includes Ghana (8.3%), Ethiopia (8.2%), Côte d’Ivoire (7.2%), Djibouti (7%), Senegal (6.9%) and Tanzania (6.8%). “With economic growth comes urbanisation, better job prospects and disposable income,” he says. “Young people in cities are no longer interested in drinking the home-brew that is a characteristic of the rural areas. They move towards brands. This is the market we want to operate in.” While growth across Africa has often been about taking two steps forward and one backward, the continent is expected to remain on a strong economic growth path, with improving trade performance in 2018 and beyond. This is riding on the global momentum of synchronised global growth currently being experienced. The company distributes brands like Tequila Fortaleza, which is a hand-crafted, 100% blue agave tequila from Jalisco, Mexico, produced by the fifth generation of the Sauza family; Don Papa Aged Rum, a small batch single island aged rum from the sugar island of Negros Occidental in the Philippines; and Mionetto Prosecco, a sparkling wine from the north of Italy. “We want to introduce retailers and taverners to a selection of ‘discovery brands’ across different categories and price spectrums,” says Leibbrandt. “We think this is a unique selling point. Each brand has its own story, but these categories are moving so fast that retailers cannot keep up with the new entrants. Our job is to simplify their selection process.” While it distributes on behalf of independent producers, the company owns two of its own brands. Bannermans Red Seal is a Scotch whisky that is produced and blended in Scotland, just outside Edinburgh. The second is a herbal spirit called Rootz, not unlike Jägermeister, which is manufactured in Nigeria and is popular across West Africa. “We have a small distribution team in Nigeria, and Rootz provides us with a strong local brand which is sold in glass bottles at an attractive price,” says Bowman. Scaling a pan-African business takes time – just ask Bowman about his experiences with SAB. So Truman & Orange has added the South African market to its portfolio, belatedly. “It was crazy to think we could be an African player, but not be in SA,” says Leibbrandt. The local operation is now growing at 300% a year. “Our biggest learning is that in SA if you have an interesting concept you can scale through retail. But the opposite is also true. However this model will be different in the other markets we are targeting.” As well as looking forward, Leibbrandt has celebrated the past, naming the company after two Victorian characters who influenced the liquor industry. Benjamin Truman is the man behind Truman’s Brewery, a London brewery that he took over in the late 1680s and which, by the end of the 19th century, was one of the largest brewers in the world. The second character is William of Orange, the Dutchman who became King William of England and is credited with turning gin from a medicinal drink into a fashionable one.