It is not easy to be a financial advisor right now. Local market performance has been poor for some time, the rand has been volatile and investors are nervous. The greatest challenge many advisors face is to get their clients to stick to a plan. If they have one. Ideally, a financial plan sets out a strategy for an investor to follow through their journey to retirement, and hopefully beyond. It sets goals and the long-term approach to achieving them that should withstand even the kind of depressed market conditions we are in at the moment. These can be hugely beneficial in getting investors to not make emotional decisions and stay invested. If they understand that they need to engage long-term thinking and they know how the strategy is meant to play out, they are more able to stick to it. However, the fundamental problem with any financial plan is that it has to make assumptions. In order to make a prediction about whether or not you are likely to reach your goals, you have to factor in things that you cannot know for certain. Assumption no.1 One of those assumptions is what kind of returns an investor is likely to see over their lifetime. It’s particularly topical at the moment. Can an advisor use historical performance as a guide to what their clients can expect to see in the future? The JSE was the best-performing stock market in the world over the last century, is it really likely that that will continue to be the case? Even in developed markets, analysts and economists are predicting future returns for stocks and bonds to below historical averages. We seem to be moving in to a lower return environment. So what are advisors plugging into their models as the expected return over the next five or 10 years from a diversified, multi-asset portfolio? Should it be inflation plus 5%, as investors would have anticipated, and received, in the past, or does that figure have to be adjusted? Only a few top-perfoming local multi-asset high equity funds have delivered that over the last three years. The average return for investors has been more in the range of inflation plus 1% or 2%. Assumption no.2 The second critical assumption is how long you are likely to live after retirement. For your grandparents, a ‘ripe old age’ might have been 85. For your parents, it could be 100. For you, it may be 120. If you retire at 65, can you really afford to live off your savings for another 55 years? That would mean being retired for longer than your working life. For how much of that period would you still be healthy enough to be reasonably independent? What would the medical bills of a 110-year-old look like? The reality These are all questions to which we really can’t know the answers. Unfortunately, that is true of even the best financial plan. We have to plan for a future that looks something like the past, because we don’t have any other reference point. Of course we can’t plan for a future that looks entirely different. If we all have to evacuate the planet and move to Mars, no financial plan is going to be able to serve us. However, we do have to consider what our back-up is if we hit a worst-case scenario that we can anticipate – that future returns are well below what we have seen in the past, and we live much longer than we expect. This is not something that can be solved with a calculator. It means seriously thinking about what you are going to do if you simply don’t have enough money. This can be an uncomfortable conversation, but there’s a good argument to be made that it should be factored in to a serious financial plan. If things really don’t work out, what does your support system look like, where and how could you live on much less than you anticipated, and what skills might you be able to use to prolong your earning ability beyond official retirement? It may be easier not to think about being in this situation, but it’s better to have a plan than to stumble into it and only try to find solutions then. Talk to your family, involve your children, understand what people are prepared to do for you, and what they aren’t. It will make it much easier to handle if and when the worst-case scenario actually plays out.