Old Mutual Limited is making good on its former parent company’s break-up plan to unlock and deliver value to shareholders. However, this is yet to be reflected in its share price. In its maiden interim results, the Africa-focused insurer spun out of Old Mutual plc (‘PLC’) declared a dividend of 45 cents per share coupled with a special dividend of R1 per share. By year-end, it will unbundle a 32% stake in Nedbank at R8.01 per share thereby returning R9.46 per share or R46.8 billion to shareholders, equivalent to around one-third of its market capitalisation. Still, shares in Old Mutual continue to trade sideways. It debuted on the JSE at R28.50 on June 26 and fell 1.84% on results day to close at R30.40. Renier de Bruyn, an investment analyst at Sanlam Private Wealth, said the intraday dip was due to reported normalised earnings being 4% less than market consensus. “The results were decent given the macroeconomic environment and investment market performance. The underlying businesses had a good half: Old Mutual is the market leader in the mass and foundation cluster, its short-term business benefited from a benign claims environment, but higher than expected claims in the personal finance business did drag on the overall results, somewhat”.  Source: Old Mutual, 2018 Overall, it reported a 13% increase in life sales on an annualised premium basis to R5.81 billion. Net client cash flows rose to R9.4 billion from R1.6 billion. Funds under management increased by 2% to R1.1 trillion from December 31, 2017. Net profit jumped 42% to R10.65 billion, reflective of the sale and distribution of PLC’s UK wealth management arm Quilter. Importantly, it also showed that it is on track to meet previously disclosed financial targets.  Source: Old Mutual, 2018 Yet its share price performance leaves much to be desired. Old Mutual chief executive Peter Moyo told Moneyweb he did not yet know what is holding the share price back. “We’ve spent a lot of time talking to investors about how we want to run the business, talking about our KPIs [key performance indicators] and talking about our eight battlegrounds. On just about everything, we’re doing the right things, on the KPIs we are almost slap bang on most of them, so I don’t know. One of the things I always say to our management team [is] that the most important thing is choosing the right things to do, go and do them and tell the market that we’ve done them. And that is exactly what we’ve done and so I’m actually fine with where we are.” He added that he does not manage the business based on the share price. Adrian Cloete, a portfolio manager at PSG Wealth, was also surprised with the muted performance especially as the insurer’s decision to declare a special dividend in addition to an interim dividend suggests that it is not going to hold onto excess cash. Unlike its former parent company PLC, Old Mutual upon listing this year fell out of London’s FTSE 100 Index, resulting in a lot of passive selling from those not mandated to hold emerging market stocks, said De Bruyn. “Despite the good disclosures from the pre-listing roadshows and this result, maybe the market doesn’t fully comprehend the value.” Per Cloete’s calculations, Old Mutual is trading at around a 30% discount to embedded value. “This is a good result; a good start and it is building a good track record. It has a strong strategy focusing on South Africa and the rest of Africa with a much clearer focus. “It may take a while for emerging market funds who didn’t invest in PLC before to invest in Old Mutual as they get to know the business and management. They must get out and tell the story to global emerging market fund managers, who can invest in them for the first time now that they are a purely emerging market player.”