South Africa’s Gross Domestic Product for the second quarter of 2018 shrank by 0.7%, impacted mainly by agriculture, transport and trade, a report by Stats SA shows. The contraction in the second quarter indicates that South Africa has entered into a recession. The 0.7% decrease follows the 2.6% decrease in the first quarter. South Africa’s Statistician-General Risenga Maluleke affirms, “We are in a recession. We reported a contraction in the first quarter… and now in the second quarter with a fall of 0.7%.” Africa’s most developed economy needs faster economic growth if it is to reduce high unemployment – currently at 27% and alleviate poverty and inequality that stokes instability. Unemployment is a hot-button issue ahead of national elections in 2019, and the ANC has made repeated pledges that things will improve. Statistics South Africa said the economic contraction in the first quarter was steeper than initially recorded, at 2.6%, and that gross fixed capital formation fell by 0.5% in the second quarter. Source: Stats SA According to the report, agriculture, forestry and fishing fell by 29.2% collectively and contributed -0.8 of a percentage point to South Africa’s GDP growth. Furthermore the transport, storage and communication industry fell by 4.9% and contributed -0.4 of a percentage point, while the trade, catering and accommodation industry decreased by 1.9%, and contributed -0.3 of a percentage point. The mining industry, finance, real estate and business services however contributed positively to GDP, increasing 1.9%. According to the report, increased economic activity was reported for financial intermediation, insurance and real estate services. Expenditure on real GDP decreased by 0.9% in the Q2 of 2018, this follows a decrease of 2.6% in Q1. Source: Stats SA Ramaphosa has made wooing foreign and domestic money a cornerstone of his economic reform agenda, so the investment numbers will come as a big disappointment. The buoyant market mood that took hold after he was elected leader of the ruling ANC in December and then president of South Africa in February appear to have dissipated. The president is currently in China, attending a summit. President Xi Jinping pledged $60 billion to African nations at Monday’s opening of a China-Africa forum on cooperation. Analysts say the data would likely make it harder for the South African Reserve Bank to raise interest rates at its upcoming meetings, and could also also draw the attention of ratings agencies, who have South Africa‘s sovereign ratings near “junk” status. “There is no way to sugar coat the numbers, the growth picture in the first half of 2018 is ugly and it shows in this economy that there is broad based weakness across the primary and tertiary sectors of the economy,” says senior economist at BNP Paribas Jeffrey Schultz. Head of research at ETM Analytics, George Glynos, said the recession was a function of years of maladministration. “Clearly this is not what Ramaphosa would like running into the elections next year,” he said. “The optics of South Africa are poor.” Jason Tuvey, senior emerging markets economist at Capital Economics, said he expected the economy to recover over the rest of this year but that a sharp rebound was unlikely. “Today’s data will further dent hopes that Cyril Ramaphosa’s presidency would lead to a marked turnaround in South Africa‘s economic fortunes,” Tuvey wrote in a note. The rand fell more than 2% on Tuesday and government bonds fell. At 09:44 GMT, the rand traded 2.25% weaker at 15.21 versus the dollar. South African sovereign dollar bonds sold off across the curve, mirroring falls for local-currency debt and the rand. The maturing 2041 bond dropped 1.9 cents to a 2-1/2 month low, according to Tradeweb, while the 2044 issue lost 1.6 cents to reach the lowest level since January 2018. “The figure speaks to the lack of economic activity, partially driven by policy uncertainty,” says Bianca Botes, corporate treasury manager at Peregrine Solutions. “Structural issues remain prevalent, while investment in manufacturing and development has been hampered by uncertainty regarding the mining charter, independence of the SA Reserve Bank and land redistribution.”