FNB has defied recessionary conditions to deliver double-digit earnings growth and best the performance of its peers within the FirstRand stable. The retail and commercial banking unit increased its contribution to FirstRand’s normalised earnings of R26.41 billion to 57% during the year to June 30, 2018, up from 53% a year earlier. FNB delivered a 16% increase in normalised earnings to R14.88 billion, helped by increases of 7% and 12% in advances to premium and commercial customers. It also delivered a return on equity of 40.7%. A 17% increase in premium customers saw the group grow its overall customer base by 4% to 8.15 million. According to Renier de Bruyn, an investment analyst at Sanlam Private Wealth, FNB’s eBucks rewards programme offers a compelling value proposition and allows it to gather customers in the desired mid to high income groups. Noting that FNB’s performance may be difficult to reconcile with South Africa’s macroeconomic conditions, FirstRand chief executive Alan Pullinger said the unit’s traction and “handsome returns” is the result of a strategy implemented some 10 years ago. He added that the growth in its customer base is partly related to ease of transacting across FNB’s different platforms and its push to migrate customers to electronic channels. Its banking app volumes grew by 65%, and continues to edge the gap to online transaction volumes. The migration to electronic channels is also helping the bank to cross-sell and up-sell products to existing transactional clients. FNB’s focus on integrated financial services is set to become even more important as competition in the banking sector heats up. “The traditional banking world of transactional banking revenues and lending margin, we think, is going to come under pressure,” said Pullinger. “For us to get huge additional market share in that space is not so easy because we’re such a big bank already and [that] is why we’re charging down the road of getting into adjacent activities to banking such as insurance and some savings and investment products. In those worlds we have got such tiny market share and we think there is great opportunity for us to scale those businesses.” Of the big four South African banks, FNB currently does “banking 101” – gaining primary transaction customers to which it cross-sells products – best, according to De Bruyn. The performance of Wesbank, the group’s vehicle and asset finance business, is more reflective of domestic trading conditions. Normalised earnings fell by 9% to R3.63 billion and its return on equity stood at 17.4%. RMB – the corporate and investment banking unit – was also subject to macroeconomic conditions as interest rate and currency movements, coupled to low growth in the mining and construction sectors (which it services) weighed on performance. It achieved a 6% increase in normalised earnings to R7.33 billion and delivered a return on equity of 25.3%. Aldermore, its recently acquired UK lending business, delivered earnings of R276 million during the final three months of FirstRand’s financial year. FirstRand declared a final dividend of R1.45 per share, bringing the total dividend for the year up 8% to R2.75 per share.