Petrochemicals giant Sasol has granted executives share options under its long-term incentive plan worth over R106 million at current prices. The grants, made to 15 directors of the parent company as well as major subsidiaries, were disclosed to the market on Wednesday. Joint presidents and chief executive officers Bongani Nqwababa and Stephen Cornell received shares worth around R22.5 million and $1.7 million respectively, with Cornell receiving US-listed American depository receipts (ADRs). Chief financial officer Paul Victor received shares worth R12 million. Bongani Nqwababa The options vest in two tranches: the first 50% after three years, and the balance after five years. The shares (and ADRs) were awarded on September 3, at a strike price of nil. The price per share (R576 and $39.26) to indicate value was the closing price as at August 31. Sasol says the remuneration committee (remco) and board approved the awards on August 16. In its 2018 remuneration report, the group notes the following for its long-term incentive plan: “In line with the practice of our peer companies, the growth in attributable earnings target was replaced with a Return On Invested Capital (ROIC) target, thereby incentivising effective capital allocations.” It discloses four equal (25%) measures as the corporate performance targets (CPTs) for the equity-settled plan: Source: Sasol 2018 Integrated Report The threshold, target and maximum reward outcomes that could be derived under the terms of the policy are included in the following graph: Source: Sasol 2018 Integrated Report In the report, remco chair Mpho Nkeli thanked “all Sasol’s shareholders for their continued support of our remuneration policy. At the November 2017 Annual General Meeting, 92.96% (2016: 90.93%) of votes cast were in favour of the remuneration policy and 89.84% supported the implementation report.” Nkeli highlights that the “group’s ‘total shareholder return’ performance was below target which again resulted in a below-target LTI plan vesting percentage. Despite low incentive scores the committee has however, as in the past, agreed to not apply its discretion in changing the outcome of the formulaic calculations.” For the 2018 financial year, the long-term incentive programme saw executives measured against three CPTs: increase in tons produced per head, growth in attributable earnings, and total shareholder return (against three different indices, including the JSE Resi 10). In 2018, they achieved a CPT score of 69%. They under-performed on the TSR as well as growth in earnings measures. In 2018, long-term incentive gains for the executive directors were as follows: Six of the eight prescribed officers also had long-term incentive gains in the year. Sasol says the “long term incentives for the 2018 financial year represent the number of units x corporate performance target achieved (2018) x closing share price on 16 August 2018. The actual vesting date for the annual awards made on 21 September 2015 is 21 September 2018. Dividend equivalents accrue at the end of the vesting period, to the extent that the LTI units vest. It represents: number of units awarded x corporate performance targets achieved during financial year 2018 x dividend equivalents up to 21 September 2018.” Additionally, it says “long-term incentive grants made in 2016 vest in 2019 with a vesting result of 69%; 50% of the vested shares are subject to a further holding period of two years.” Nkeli says planned remuneration policy enhancements for the year ahead include the “review of the design of our incentive plans to ensure ongoing relevance and competitiveness”, the “review of the employee value proposition offered to all our employees”, the “implementation of a single Non-executive Director fee structure” and “detailed internal equity analysis”. * Hilton Tarrant works at YFM. He can still be contacted at hilton@moneyweb.co.za.