The discretionary fund manager (DFM) industry has seen rapid growth over the last few years, both in terms of assets under advisory management and the number of DFMs in the market. The reason for the rise is twofold: the first is impending Retail Distribution Review (RDR) legislation, which will place a greater onus on advisers to make informed investment decisions; and secondly, because of the value they add to financial advisors’ practices and their investment processes. Over the last five years or so, independent financial advisors have had to take a good look at what their core business is: connecting with clients, educating them, and helping them make the best financial decisions. Partnering with DFMs has enabled advisors to spend more time on this core part of their business, enhancing clients’ experience with their firm. By my estimation there are close 40 DFM firms operating in the South African market. They range from established players who have been around for more than five years and have solid client bases and assets under advisory of over R10 billion, to new entrants coming into the market within the last two years. On the face of it, the core offerings of DFMs seem very similar. They take on the portfolio management selection responsibility, leaving financial advisors to exploit their strengths in terms of advising and servicing clients. It’s not that simple, however, because each DFM has a distinct value proposition on offer to financial advisors. Some have specific client portals with tools and reports that advisors can use, while others have value-added services like advisor support, including in-depth analysis of the advisor’s business model. The investment styles of DFMs, and the way they view risk, will also differ, as will the investment vehicles they use –whether model portfolios or fund of funds, or both. Industry growth has made it increasingly difficult for advisors to choose a DFM. This is a process that requires careful consideration because the partnership and business fit is critical in enhancing the client experience. Here are some ideas advisors might want to consider before choosing a DFM: Step 1 – Articulate why you want a DFM Make sure you know exactly why you want to use a DFM, and put this down on paper. This will force you to think about the ‘why’ properly, and will help in the filtering process as you will have a good idea of the services you require. Step 2 – Filtering Create a shortlist based on a number of criteria identified as key to your choice of partner. A good way of doing this is to create a due diligence document and send it out to the DFMs. Some key questions you might ask: You can also do some research of your own, looking at websites, reading articles and speaking to trusted colleagues in the industry to get an independent view of DFMs. Step 3 – Meet those on the shortlist Once you have a good sense of the shortlist of no more than three or four DFMs, set up meetings between your team and the managers, preferably at their offices. In this forum you can obtain clarity on the due diligence questions and get a sense of the team. In my view, the cultural and business fit is one of the most important aspects for a successful partnership. Step 4 – Review and decide Following the meetings and due diligence analysis, it is a good idea to revisit step one and evaluate which DFMs meet the requirements set out originally. This, together with your impression of the various businesses, will put you in a good position to make your choice of preferred DFM partner. Stephen Backhouse is key account manager at INN8.