Here’s what caught our attention on Thursday: 1. August PPI South Africa’s producer price index for August rose 6.3% year-on-year, following the 6.1% recorded in July. The August data is being recorded as the highest level since December 2016. 2. Steinhoff ‘s Asia business rebrands Steinhoff Asia Pacific Group has announced a rebranding and will now operate under the name of Greenlit Brands. The company plans to refinance and restructure some of its financial indebtedness, which according to a recently-issued statement, is a positive step for the company as it managed to secure a ‘multi-year facility with a syndicate of three Australia-based banks’. Greenlit Brands is independent from Steinhoff in terms of its working capital requirements. Read full statement here. 3. Adcorp issues trading statement Adcorp, a business process outsourcing company issued a trading statement for the six months ended August 31, 2018, in which it flags its total basic earnings per share to be between 82 cents and 100 cents, which is an improvement from the total basic loss per share of 120.7 cents reported in the previous year. The company expects headline earnings to be between 85 cents and 93 cents compared to the total headline loss per share of 40.1 cents in 2017. The group’s results are expected to be released on October 15, 2018. 4. Acsa financial results State-owned Airports Company South Africa (Acsa) is due to release its financial results for 2018. The airport operator last year reported a 10.8% rise in full-year profits and is said to be one of the better performing parastatals in South Africa. Update to follow. 5. D-Day for Queen B The tide is coming closer and we not sure if anyone is ready. First it seems that former social development Minister, Bathabile Dlamini will be hit. On Thursday, the Constitutional Court will decide if Dlamini will be held personally liable for the mess that was the social grant distributions at Sassa. Moneyweb is reporting that the Black Sash, a human rights group, is advocating for Dlamini to pay legal costs from her pocket. Read: Sassa legal costs: D-day for Bathabile Dlamini