There is a generation of young adult South Africans who have never been employed, and not because they don’t want jobs. Some of them have a second generation of families that have never been formally employed. This may seem absurd or even inconceivable. Pause for a moment and remember that South Africa’s structural unemployment did not miraculously appear after 1994. Rising long-term unemployment was a feature of the apartheid government in the 1970s and 1980s – as outlined by Martine Mariotti and Johan Fourie (2014): The economics of apartheid: An introduction, Economic History of Developing Regions – and continues to be so in democratic South Africa. If unemployment was used as a ‘lead indicator’ of an economy’s health, persistently high unemployment would have downgraded South Africa to a ‘poor economy’ instead of an emerging one. This is worrying because research suggests that the effects of long-term unemployment (LTU) extend beyond the labour market. In South Africa, where a single income often supports multiple families, long-term unemployment has a direct impact on that worker and their family’s social capital; furthermore, the stress of being out of work can influence an individual’s mental well-being and change family dynamics. Additionally, the scarring effects of LTU on the worker can be directly linked to two important features of their role in the labour market – (i) the loss of skills over time, and (ii) that even upon finding work the individual may accept lesser wages than previously earned. I deliberately used the word ‘scarring’. At the same time, as employers grow and expand their operations, they adopt new technologies that in some cases replace workers, and in others require that they have skills that they do not possess. From a microeconomic perspective, lower wages often accepted by the worker after reemployment can have a negative effect too. Consider a worker who earned R3 800 before being retrenched, but after being unemployed for five years they settle for R3 000 out of fear of remaining unemployed. The deficit can cause serious deficiencies to the future economic health of that person or household. For those who have suffered prolonged unemployment, the economic scars remain long after they find another job because the chances of returning to the level of income enjoyed before job loss are eroded. Not forgetting the long-lasting reduction of family income and the effects thereof on the human and social capital. Even with the aid of government programmes such as the Unemployment Insurance Fund (UIF), unemployment forces a continued decline in consumption because the aid barely covers basic needs. This leads to reductions in education, health and food spending, among others. The loss of income, poverty and resource scarcity stemming from long-term unemployment affects education, health and mobility outcomes. Worse, the damaging ripple effect can be passed from one generation to the next. The effects of widespread prolonged unemployment and job losses can fan out across the economy and choke real and potential output. The persistent LTU of the youth especially exposes the fragility of the labour market, a major component of the economy. The consequences of rising long-term unemployment are as devastating at societal level as they are at the level of the individual. In his book When Work Disappears: The World of the New Urban Poor (1996), American academic WJ Wilson states that “many of today’s problems – crime, family dissolution, welfare, low levels of social organisation are fundamentally a consequence of the disappearance of work”. It’s disconcerting how a comment made in the 1990s about joblessness in urban areas in the US so fittingly describes what is unfolding in present-day South Africa. There is no scenario where long-term unemployment can simply be shrugged off as one of the glitches in society. As more and more people become unemployed, there is a greater risk of them becoming permanently detached from the labour market. We saw evidence of this during the Great Recession, and even as the American economy recovered. How much more so for an emerging economy like ours. LTU for young South African job seekers is devastating – unemployment trends today forecast unemployment of the future. Unless long-term unemployment becomes a policy priority for government and is part of the public private partnership programme, South Africa will fail to reduce joblessness. 1. Martine Mariotti & Johan Fourie (2014) The economics of apartheid: An introduction, Economic History of Developing Regions.