Brent crude extended gains from the highest level in almost four years as a chorus of banks and trading houses argued prices may spike after OPEC rebuffed President Donald Trump’s call to rapidly boost production. Futures rose as much as 1.2% in London after a 3.1% advance Monday. Mercuria Energy and Trafigura Group expect the return of $100 a barrel, last seen in 2014, due to a potential loss in Iranian supply. Bank of America and JPMorgan Chase & Co. also predicted higher prices, while options traders appear to have joined the speculation. Oil rallied after the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries and its partners stopped short of pledging immediate production increases even though looming US sanctions on Iran have started removing barrels from the market. Still, a trade standoff between America and China could put energy demand at risk in the longer term, with BP warning that the concern hasn’t been priced into crude yet. “The only way is up for the energy complex, with Brent briefly scrambling past $82 a barrel to touch a fresh four-year high,” PVM Oil Associates analyst Stephen Brennock wrote in a report. “Market bulls are still riding high after OPEC’s decision not to address the shortfall in Iranian oil supplies. A supply crunch now potentially looms on the horizon.”  Brent for November settlement rose as much as $1 to $82.20 a barrel on the ICE Futures Europe exchange and traded at $81.82 as of 8:45 am New York time. The contract climbed $2.40 to $81.20 a barrel on Monday, the highest since November 2014. The global benchmark traded at a $9.41 premium to West Texas Intermediate. WTI for November delivery traded at $72.41 a barrel on the New York Mercantile Exchange, up 33 cents, after rising $1.30 on Monday. Total volume traded was about 30% below the 100-day average. With the US sanctions on Iran taking full effect in early November, $100 crude could be becoming more realistic, according to some of the biggest oil traders. Brent may top that level next quarter as the market lacks the excess capacity to replace Iranian barrels, Mercuria co-founder Daniel Jaeggi said this week. That prediction was echoed by Trafigura co-head of oil trading Ben Luckock. Other oil-market news: Iran’s oil tankers are starting to disappear from global satellite tracking systems with just under six weeks to go until US sanctions are due to hit the country’s exports.