Here’s what caught our attention on Thursday: 1. MPC interest rate decision The South African Reserve Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee will meet on Thursday to discuss its interest rate decision. Analysts say it is highly unlikely that the MPC will raise the interest rate given the current recession and slow economy. The MPC kept the repo rate steady at 6.5% on July 19. The decision will be announced at 3:00 pm. Update to follow. 2. Prime overdraft rate South Africa’s prime overdraft rate or bank lending rate will be announced on Thursday. On August 10, South Africa’s bank lending rate remained unchanged at 10%. The bank lending rate averaged 12.30% from 1957 to 2018, data from Trading Economics shows. The announcement will be made at 3:00 pm. Update to follow. 3. State capture inquiry developments Banks blew the lid at the state capture inquiry this week. Standard Bank’s Ian Sinton was the first to explain how two cabinet ministers, namely, then mineral resources minister Mosebenzi Zwane and labour minister Mildred Oliphant, asked him to reverse the bank’s decision to close the Gupta company accounts in 2016, after it was revealed that they were engaging in illicit transactions. FirstRand’s Johan Burger followed and implicated ANC’s economic subcommittee chairman Enoch Godongwana in his testimony, and to no surprise, Nedbank’s Mike Brown implicated Zwane as well for making ‘veiled threats’ for the closure of the accounts. 4. Life Healthcare exits Indian market Private hospital group, Life Healthcare announced on Wednesday its decision to exit the Indian market. Life Healthcare will be selling its entire 49.7% stake in India’s Max Healthcare to a global investment firm for R4.3 billion. Reuters is reporting that the hospital group says it wants to focus on operations elsewhere. The deal is expected to be finalised by the end of the year. 5. Rand update The rand has been rallying so far this week between the announcement of the slowing of CPI on Wednesday and the MPC’s interest rate decision expected on Thursday. At 8:46 am the rand was at R14.54 to the dollar. We’ll be keeping our eye on it as the day progresses.