Growthpoint Properties has become the latest real estate company to be questioned by a fund manager over the use of other sources of income to inflate earnings and, in turn, dividend payments to investors. Standard Bank’s securities arm, SBG Securities, says in a research note dated September 14 that Growthpoint generated about R145 million in income from “non-recurring sources” in its 2018 financial year, which the company then used to deliver a 6.5% growth in dividends. In other words, SBG Securities suggests that Growthpoint paid dividends that weren’t only coming from its property rentals – as is the standard for property companies – but from other sources of income, in order to boost dividend payments. Without the R145 million income, Growthpoint’s dividend growth for the year to June 2018 would reduce to about 4% from the declared 6.5%, according to SBG Securities’ calculations. However, it doesn’t accuse the company of fraud or any financial irregularities. “Our analysis suggests that GRT [Growthpoint] supplemented its earnings base with low-quality sources to defend against weak domestic fundamentals – thus inflating the earnings base,” says SBG Securities. SBG Securities’ concerns mirror those of other fund managers that have released critical reports accusing the Resilient group of using non-property income to artificially boost dividends. It also marks a turning point, with more fund managers conducting their own research and having a say about the direction of the companies they invest in on behalf of clients. Growthpoint is the second largest JSE-listed real estate company by market capitilisation (R75 billion). Its flagship asset is the V&A Waterfront precinct in Cape Town, which it co-owns with the Public Investment Corporation. It also owns equity stakes in offshore companies Growthpoint Properties Australia (a 65.5% stake), London stock-exchange listed-Globalworth Real Estate Investments (29%) and Poland-focused Globalworth Poland Real Estate (21.6%). Growthpoint concluded its investment in Romania-focused Globalworth Real Estate Investments (GWI) at the end of 2016 and proceeded to enter the Polish market by investing in Globalworth Poland Real Estate (GPRE) in June 2018. Growthpoint generates income from both companies, through the dividends they independently declare. SBG Securities says the other sources of income that Growthpoint included in dividend payments are an estimated R35 million in “underwriting fees” (which contributed 0.6 percentage point to the dividend growth) and the R110 million (or 1.9 percentage point) unlocked by Growthpoint’s purchase of the stakes in GWI and GPRE, which “was largely done cum-dividend [with a dividend still to be paid].” It states: “All together, we show that this has inflated the income base by about R145 million of non-recurring sources. This means that GRT’s LFL [like-for-like] DPS [distributions/dividends per share] growth in FY18 is c [circa] 4% by our calculations and this still includes the positive funding spreads [low cost of debt in Europe and high-yields on properties] earned on offshore acquisitions of GWI and GPRE stakes.” Two key events Two key events prompted Growthpoint to “supplement its earnings base” in 2018: – It delayed execution of various property deals, which resulted in the company not generating its expected R90 – R100 million in development fee profits. – A stronger Australian dollar/rand coupled with a higher withholding tax (which increased to 16% from 8% in 2017) negatively impacted the value of Growthpoint’s income from Growthpoint Australia. Growthpoint forecast that its dividend growth would slow to 4.5% in the 2019 financial year. However, SBG Securities says dividend growth will likely be as low as 2.9%. Growthpoint management expects the resumption of trading profits and development fee income in 2019 due to a “strong development pipeline for third-party assets”, the income from which SBG Securities estimates will be R96 million. However, even if Growthpoint generates this income, it will still have “another R50 million hole to plug before any growth [in dividends] can be generated from core sources.” Growthpoint responds Estienne de Klerk, CEO of Growthpoint SA, says the company has held itself to “superb transparency” regarding the disclosure of earnings. De Klerk says Growthpoint had already disclosed that a bulk of its dividend growth (3.6% out of 6.5%) for the 2018 financial year derived from its direct property portfolio. “The focus [on non-property related income] is a very small component of our earnings and this line item has been disclosed,” he says. Source: Growthpoint FY18 results presentation. “Given the sensitivities in the sector around disclosure and quality of earnings maybe with other counters at the moment, clearly it’s getting a disproportionate amount of attention,” he told Moneyweb. Asked if real estate investment trusts (Reits) like Growthpoint should include other income in dividend payments, he says only if the market is happy that the majority of dividend payments derive from stable, growing and predictable income. “At the end of the day, analysts should have an unfettered ability to write what they want. We speak directly to all our big investors. Maybe the aspersion that the quality of Growthpoint’s earnings has deteriorated materially might be a little bit extreme when it’s not material in the scheme of things.” De Klerk says analyst don’t generally like that Growthpoint has a development business, which exposes the company to variable development profits every year. He has also defended the company’s offshore equity investments, which diversify the company’s sources of income and offer benefits from positive funding spreads. “In a [domestic] economy that is deteriorating quicker than you can imagine, our strategy of internationalising makes sense. That’s what you need to do to keep the pots boiling. We have responsibilities to our shareholders.”