“The biggest corporate failure, yes. Scandal – it’s the word of those seeking sensationalism.” This is how disgraced former Steinhoff CEO Markus Jooste described the implosion of the high-flying retailer in Parliament last week. It was a rare public appearance for a greying and weary-looking Jooste, who has kept a low-profile in Hermanus since Steinhoff admitted to accounting fraud on December 6, 2017. This has unleashed a financial markets rout, with Steinhoff’s shares losing R205 billion in value and investors have little chance of recouping their losses. Flanked by lawyers, a brazen and unapologetic Jooste said everything I expected him to say – absolutely nothing. On a cursory view, Jooste pleaded innocence. Despite dedicating 29 years of his life to building Steinhoff, he was not aware of any financial irregularities and blamed the company’s failure on its external auditor Deloitte and a business partner in Germany. He came short of blaming the El Niño drought and former president Jacob Zuma (the way we blame him for everything) for the Steinhoff mess. On a serious note, Jooste said he resigned as CEO on December 4 because Deloitte asked for a forensic investigation into Steinhoff’s books, which he thought would delay the release of its financial results. According to Jooste, the only mistake he made was to enter into a strategic partnership in 2007 with Austrian businessman Andreas Seifert, who started spreading rumours about Steinhoff. This led to German tax authorities starting an investigation into Steinhoff, which Jooste said tanked the company. His version of events was a bizarre display of obfuscation, which even led to an MP saying he was portraying himself as the “Mother Theresa of Steinhoff”. Reflection of corporate SA Jooste’s attitude is probably a reflection of how corporate South Africa has been given a free pass in being held accountable for corruption and fraud. For many years, the face of corruption has been the public sector – with its mismanagement of taxpayer money, wasteful expenditure and flawed tender processes thrust into the national agenda. Corporate South Africa has even weighed in, waxing lyrical about how corruption in the state negatively impacts investor confidence, which in turn puts investors off. But corruption in the private sector has a way of escaping the public space or momentarily finding some space before disappearing. Every time a corporate scandal erupts, many resort to saying: “You see? It’s not just the government, it also happens in the private sector.” The Steinhoff scandal didn’t happen by accident. It was allowed to happen because the application of existing legislation on financial disclosures and the fiduciary role of directors to disclose accounting blips was not proactive. And because law enforcement agencies like the Hawks – compromised during the Zuma years and inept at throwing the book at wrongdoers – have probably emboldened the likes of Jooste. Hawks major-general Alfred Khana reportedly told Parliament that “there is not a shred of evidence” in the three main Steinhoff investigation dockets – thus it cannot proceed with the questioning of individuals or the issuing of arrest warrants. This probably explains why Jooste was not remorseful in Parliament – he knows his lame excuses might protect him from criminal charges. Many before him have survived corporate scandals. Despite almost causing system risk to the country and its banking system, former African Bank CEO Leon Kirkinis and those who played a role in the bank’s collapse got off scot-free. And father and son attorneys Ronald and Darren Bobroff, who fleeced Road Accident Fund victims out of millions of rands, are still living it up in Australia. Advice for the Hawks The Hawks must cast their net across other members of the previous Steinhoff board to refute Jooste’s version of events. Jooste didn’t act alone in engineering the crisis and was probably aided by the no fewer than six accounting-savvy CAs on the previous board. They could spill the beans on the off-balance sheet transactions and offshore fake buying groups that Jooste created to artificially boost profits, which he still maintains were kosher. South Africans are eager to see the wrongdoers in these corruption-related probes prosecuted. There is a danger of the country becoming disillusioned or angry by the absence of remorse they show and the lack of consequences they face. Maybe I’m overly pessimistic. But like Jooste, I’ll obfuscate and blame it on the cold weather and the last remnants of winter.