Here’s what caught our attention on Friday: 1. President to announce details about stimulus package Something is looming over at the desk of the presidency, and its details are due to be revealed on Friday. Amid South Africa’s current gloom (the recession, not the weather), the president will announce an ‘economic stimulus package’ which seeks to kickstart and steer the challenged economy in the right direction. Stay tuned. 2. Clicks CEO announces retirement The current CEO of Clicks, David Kneale has announced his decision to retire as CEO and as an executive member of the health and beauty retailer, effective January 1, 2019. He will however assume the position as group strategic advisor until August 31, 2019. The current COO, Vikesh Ramsunder will take over as the CEO in January 2019. 3. Mining Charter tabled before cabinet The long-awaited Mining Charter, which has done its rounds, was finally tabled and approved by cabinet on Thursday. The charter seeks to address black ownership in the mining industry and also seeks to find ways to increase investment into the industry. The revised charter will be detailed by President Cyril Ramaphosa, when he announces the details of his stimulus package to the nation on Friday morning. Read: Cabinet approves new mining charter 4. Behind the scenes of the ‘construction mafia’ The construction mafia, as it is known, has an ambition to fulfil the terms of ‘radical economic transformation’, regardless of consequence. The president of the Federation for Radical Economic Transformation spoke to Moneyweb in an exclusive and reveals the extremes it would go to, to achieve financial freedom and a better life for the people in the industry. Read:  ‘We have told them about Marikana’- Construction Mafia 5. Rand update It’s the long weekend and we want to enjoy it, but before we decide to splurge big, let’s see what the rand is doing following the Sarb’s announcement to keep the repo rate on hold. At 8:22 the rand was at R14.32 to the dollar, a marginal gain from Thursday’s close.