Earlier adverse findings against Tigon-accused Gary Porritt caught up with him on Tuesday when Judge Brian Spilg quoted them in admitting two documents into evidence despite Porritt’s objections. Porritt and co-accused Sue Bennett are standing trail on more than 3 000 counts of fraud, racketeering and contraventions of the Income Tax Act and the Prevention of Organised Crime Act. The charges relate to the collapse around 2000 of then JSE-listed financial services group Tigon. Porritt was the CEO and Bennett a director. Read: Porritt acts just like Zuma, court finds The pair has succeeded in delaying the start of the trial until late 2016 by bringing several appeals and applications, the Supreme Court of Appeal earlier found. Both are unrepresented in the trial, claiming they have no money to pay for legal representation. Porritt is currently cross-examining the state’s first witness, Jack Milne. Milne was the CEO of Progressive Systems College Guaranteed Growth, an investment fund that was underwritten by Tigon. Milne earlier testified that he, Porritt and Bennett conspired to mislead investors. According to his version they misled investors to believe Milne would invest their funds in a diversified portfolio, but in fact planned to invest in only two shares – that of Tigon and its subsidiary Shawcell. Porritt has denied this. Milne on Tuesday referred to two documents to support his earlier evidence. They were first provisionally admitted in September 2016. Porritt then said he needed to consult legal counsel before taking a position with regard to the admissibility of the documents. When Spilg on Tuesday again asked Porritt what his position was regarding the admission of the documents, he said he first needed to get legal advice. Spilg then pointed out that Porritt had had ample opportunity to do so and had the services of senior counsel and attorneys during his fresh bail application late last year. When Porritt objected that that counsel’s instruction was limited to the bail application, Spilg said he had to rely on the ruling of Judge Ramarumo Monama in March in the bail matter and several other courts before him. He referred to the finding that Porritt uses legal representation as a stratagem when it suits his purpose and pointed out that Monama found that the application was spurious. Spilg said it was a wasteful use of resources and proceeded to admit the two documents. Milne’s cross-examination proceeded. At one stage Milne turned to Porritt and looked him defiantly straight in the eye. This was the first time since the start of the trial in late 2016 that Milne has looked at Porritt. Following an earlier plea and sentence agreement Milne served a prison sentence in relation to his role in the collapse of PSCGG. He was released some years ago. Right through his testimony-in-chief in this trial and his subsequent cross-examination by Porritt, Milne refused to look at Porritt. This seemed to irritate Porritt. On Tuesday Porritt challenged Milne, saying he cannot look him and Bennett in the eye. He presumably tried to imply shame on Milne’s part for implicating them in the alleged conspiracy. Milne then dramatically turned to Porritt, gave him what Judge Brian Spilg described to the record as “a strong gaze” lasting several seconds, before he resumed looking at Spilg. “I don’t address Mr Porritt, I address the court,” he stated defiantly. Spilg ordered Porritt to file an affidavit to explain his absence from court the previous day. He is currently being held in the Johannesburg prison known as Sun City, after he forfeited his bail around June last year. Porritt said he suffered from diarrhoea, but did not have a doctor’s certificate to that effect. Although Porritt initially complained on Tuesday that he had difficulty concentrating, he stood for hours while conducting cross-examination and seemed fully aware. He has lost a lot of weight since his incarceration around June last year. The trial will continue on Wednesday.