European shares rose on Tuesday after Chinese President Xi Jinping promised to cut import tariffs, fuelling optimism that a trade war between his country and the US could be averted. Gains were widespread, with the STOXX 600 closing up 0.82%, slightly below Wall Street, where the S&P 500 was up 1.8% in morning trading. Xi promised to open China’s economy further and lower import tariffs on products including cars, which helped the auto index jump about 1.9%. “We would see this as a major step towards opening the Chinese economy and to easing the very tense trade atmosphere … The primary beneficiaries would be German carmakers and the German economy as a whole,” Evercore ISI analysts wrote. Germany’s BMW rose 1.9% and Daimler was up 1.2%, while Volkswagen surged 4.5%. Volkswagen carmaker is reported to be seeking to replace Chief Executive Matthias Mueller with the head of its core brand, Herbert Diess, as part of a broader overhaul of its management structure to boost efficiency. The basic resources index gained the most, rising 2.7%, as it also recovered from large losses on Monday when stocks exposed to Russia were hit after the United States announced fresh sanctions. Higher-than-expected quarterly revenues at Oslo-listed TGS Nopec, a key supplier to the oil industry, boosted its share price, which soared more than 15%. The oil and gas sector gained overall as oil hit $70 a barrel on Tuesday, in its biggest two-day rally in nearly a month. New developments in mergers and acquisitions also moved shares. French payments firm Ingenico rose 7.1% after US competitor Verifone agreed to be taken private for $2.58 billion in cash by Francisco. Bayer rose 4.7% after the WSJ reported that the US Justice Department would allow the German drugs and pesticides group to acquire Monsanto in a $62.5 billion deal, after the companies agreed to sell more assets to win antitrust approval. LVMH rose 4.9% to record highs after the Louis Vuitton owner posted better-than-expected sales growth in the first quarter, helped by thriving Chinese demand for luxury goods. Its solid update boosted shares in other luxury companies such as Kering, up 3.2%.