Glass-packaging manufacturer Consol will be making its reappearance on the JSE’s main board after an absence of ten years on the local bourse. The R6.2 billion annual revenue group is SA’s largest glassmaker boasting a more than 70% market share of the local glass-container market – outweighing close competitor Nampak, which claims a market share of about 20%. A successful listing of Consol, which is expected in May, might give the company a value of between R10 billion and R75 billion – a range in line with its soon-to-be JSE industrial peers. Consol plans to raise more than R2.7 billion via a private placement to strengthen its balance sheet and reduce undisclosed debt owed to shareholders, which include a consortium of private equity investors. Consol was initially unbundled from diversified consumer brands company AVI in 2005 and was delisted in 2007 after it was bought by private equity investors including Brait Private Equity, Old Mutual Private Equity, Sanlam Private Equity, HarbourVest Partners and the management of Consol for R6.1 billion – scoring a more than 70% collective stake in the company. The remaining shareholders include Sphere Holdings and the Public Investment Corporation, with a stake of 10% and 9.8% respectively. Mike Arnold, CEO of Consol, said the private equity investors have been looking to relist the company for a while, as the it has ambitions to expand further into rest of Africa in markets including Angola, Egypt, and Tanzania. “We think now is a good time to list so we can accelerate our plans to grow our business and simplify our capital structure,” said Arnold. Consol’s glass packaging operations span across SA, Kenya, and Nigeria where it has the capacity to produce 932 000 tonnes of glass annually and supply it to customer industries including beer, wine, flavoured alcoholic beverages, non-alcoholic beverages, spirits and food. It will commission a new facility in Ethiopia in the fourth quarter of 2018, which will grow its annual grass production capacity by 5%. However, a big part of the listing will be repaying private equity investors that have supported Consol over the past ten years. Depending on the capital raised to repay loans held by private equity investors, Arnold said some of the shareholder debt would be converted into equity upon listing. This means that some private equity investors will remain shareholders post the JSE-listing. Although Consol didn’t disclose the level of free float – a key metric to determine shares to be publicly held and traded – Arnold said it would be “substantial”. “There will be a good balance between the free float and shares held by investors and management.” This detail will be disclosed in a prospectus in the next few weeks. Consol’s latest results indicate that revenue grew by more than 7% to R3.7 billion for the six months to December 2017 and the adjusted earnings before interest tax depreciation and amortisation accelerated by 4% to R936 million over the same period. The company’s various investments in new glass production capacity are expected to grow its adjusted Ebitda margin between 26% to 28% over the medium term.