Moneyweb has learnt that international wealth manager, Chase Buchanan, has been offering services to South African clients without being authorised to do so. The Financial Services Conduct Authority (FSCA – previously the FSB) has confirmed that this is in contravention of the Financial Advisory and Intermediary Services (Fais) Act. According to its website, Chase Buchanan “is an independent financial advisory company, which provides unbiased financial solutions to both corporate and private clients in the UK and based internationally”. The company’s headquarters are in Cyprus. Recently Moneyweb received a copy of an email sent by a representative of Chase Buchanan offering services to ex-pats resident in South Africa. The email appeared to be generic, soliciting interest in the firm’s services: “I am writing specifically to make you aware of a solution which can benefit British ex-pats living in South Africa and foreign nationals with frozen UK pensions – the possibility of consolidating and transferring a UK pension to a self-invested personal pension (SIPP – issued in the UK by the Inland Revenue in 1989),” it read. When asked to provide details of the licence under which they were authorised to offer such financial advice or intermediary services in South Africa, the representative of Chase Buchanan replied that: “Only investment firms headquartered in South Africa are regulated directly by the FSB, whereas we provide cross-border services using our MiFID Passport; our regulatory authority is CySEC. Please feel free to visit our company’s profile on CySEC’s website to find that South Africa is actually one of the countries in which we are licensed to provide cross-border financial advice: http://www.cysec.gov.cy/en-GB/entities/investment-firms/cypriot/76606/.” Not an authorised FSP However, according to the FSCA’s Caroline da Silva, this is incorrect. “MiFID II only applies to entities providing investment services or performing investment activities in the European Union (EU), including when those services or activities are rendered in the EU but to clients outside the EU,” she explained. “The passporting provisions only apply to member states. South Africa is not a member state.” Da Silva said that no one, whether they are local or foreign, may provide financial services in South Africa unless they are authorised as a Financial Services Provider (FSP) or appointed as a representative of an authorised FSP. This is irrespective of whether they are authorised or regulated in another jurisdiction. “It is thus not correct to state that only investments firms ‘headquartered’ or domiciled in South Africa are subject to regulation by the FSCA,” she said Even marketing a service that one is not authorised to provide falls foul of the act. “No person may in any manner or by any means, whether within or outside the republic, canvass for, market or advertise any business related to the rendering of financial services by any person who is not an authorised financial services provider or a representative of such a provider,” she noted. Moneyweb attempted to contact Chase Buchanan for a response, but emails to both the sender of the original email and the company’s general address went unanswered. Recourse An important question this now raises is where this leaves any South African residents who took up Chase Buchanan’s service offering. What should they do now? According to Da Silva, the FSCA does not regulate consumers. If they want to receive advice from an international firm, they are therefore entitled to do so. However, they must be aware of the potential complications. Since Chase Buchanan is not regulated by the FSCA, customers will have no recourse to lodge a complaint with the local authorities should anything go wrong. In addition, if they now want to get out of the arrangement because Chase Buchanan should not have been marketing locally in the first place, then it is unclear what recourse they have. Da Silva said this is something to which the regulator would have to apply its mind. She did however confirm that the FSCA had reported the matter to the Cyprus regulators.