“Ramaphoria” – the new word that sums up the wave of positive sentiment recently unlocked by Cyril Ramaphosa’s presidency –  has hit many sections of the country. And if you want to see the new word in action, look no further than economic growth projections, which show a more optimistic path for SA’s economic revival than a year ago. Read: SA growth could pick up faster than expected, Sarb says Ramaphosa’s presidency, which might balance market expectations by proposing pro-business and investor policies against the ANC’s populist strains, is prompting many economists and institutions to revise their 2018 economic growth forecasts upwards. Grow projections of 1.5%, 2% or more for 2018 have become the new normal – assuming that the global economic recovery and commodity prices continue and a stronger rand will rein in inflation and boost consumer spending. The World Bank is the latest to inject a note of optimism into SA, mildly lifting its early economic growth estimate from 1.1% to 1.4% for 2018 and for 2019 to 1.9%, up from 1.7%. However, the bank’s projections are still below the National Treasury’s forecasts of 1.5% for 2018, rising to 1.8% for 2019. The World Bank’s projection is still well below the average of emerging market countries with similar wealth levels, which are pencilling in growth of 4.5% for 2018 and 4.7% for 2019.  “Nobody should get excited by less than 2% growth. It is low and won’t make a difference when other emerging markets are growing at a rate of 4% and 5%. This is where we want SA to go,” said Marek Hanusch, senior economist at the World Bank. An improvement in business and consumer confidence under President Ramaphosa doesn’t necessarily translate to economic growth, Hanusch warned. “An economy doesn’t just run on confidence. Although a revival in confidence is good, the economy requires actual business investments. Confidence is intangible unless you are seeing investment decisions being made.” Although private sector investment rebounded from the second quarter of 2017, the level of investment still remains low (see graph below). Source: Stats SA, Sacci Investment bank Goldman Sachs also revised growth upwards to 2.3% in 2018 from 1.5%. It expects a Ramaphosa presidency to deliver more market-friendly economic policies, which would provide an impetus for growth and position SA as the next top emerging market destination for investors akin to Brazil in 2016 and Mexico in 2017. Read: A new dawn awaits SA – Goldman Sachs S&P is upbeat on SA’s economic growth prospects Joining Goldman Sachs in the 2% economic growth region is ratings agency S&P Global. The ratings agency, which has placed the local currency rating on junk, expects economic growth to accelerate by 2% in 2018 and 2.1% in 2019 – higher than Treasury’s forecasts. Sovereign analyst Gardner Rusike welcomed Ramaphosa’s efforts to reform state-owned entities (SOEs), including Eskom and SAA, with the removal of board members tied to the state capture project as well as government’s return to fiscal consolidation. However, Rusike warned that targets in the February budget still showed fiscal deterioration although the situation has improved compared with the dire October medium-term budget. A revenue shortfall of R50.8 billion in the nation’s finances would be plugged through a VAT increase to 15% from 14% – the first increase since 1993. Early estimates were that public debt would exceed 60% of the gross domestic product by 2020-21 but the February budget has revised it down to 56%. This begs the questions: Is SA in a better position than a year ago? And is the optimism in growth projections justified? RMB economist Isaiah Mhlanga reckons so. “There are clear changes in the leadership of SOEs and government has taken some steps to improve their governance. This is an important development, but we are still to see reform progress in other areas,” said Mhlanga, who expects SA’s economy to advance by 1.7% in 2018 and 1.9% in 2019. Taking into account of the pace of global growth, SA should be growing around 2% to 2.5% in 2018, said Stanlib chief economist Kevin Lings. “World growth strengthened last year and global trade went through a very good phase last year. We saw a pickup in SA’s export and an improvement in trade balance and a narrowing current account deficit. All of that contributes to SA growth,” he said. Lings said the big hindrance in SA benefitting from global growth is the threat of a US trade war, as SA would lose a lot because it’s a marginal producer of products including steel, and an absence of investments in the private sector, especially new capital expenditure. Read: Tripped up by trade trepidations