SAA reluctantly published their audited 2016/2017 annual report in April 2018, as they were winding up the 2017/2018 financial year. The Auditor-General (AG) delivered a damning qualified report, and indicated that “a material uncertainty exists that may cast significant doubt on the company’s ability to continue as a going concern”. It is perturbing that the 2016/17 annual report was only released in April 2018, even though it had been finalised and signed off on December 8 2017 by the AG. Minister Malusi Gigaba (then Minister of Finance), requested Parliament to approve the delay in filing the report, citing “technical accounting matters” which had not been resolved. Really? In my view, in a climate of no corporate governance, “technical accounting matters” cannot explain away the substantial restatement of financial figures, the inability to verify certain assets and values because of a lack of evidence, and not meeting the test of a going concern. The fact that the new board of directors spent some four months in delaying the publishing of this report, meant that they didn’t immediately start addressing critical concerns which are further eroding the broken business. These include: no corporate governance; lack of, or no systems of internal control; no, or poor records; holding corrupt officials accountable; implementing a proper accounting system; implementing a proper procurement system, and vetting top officials. The 184-page annual report is plastered with unnecessary embellishments which do more to irritate than placate, for example, glowing reports on “the most revered brand in Africa”, despite the fact that it is unable to produce a profit. Getting down to the nitty gritty, I have summarised the most important AG qualifications below: Basis for qualified opinion Qualified opinion Property, aircraft and equipment The existence of all assets could not be verified, and the AG could not determine the correct net carrying amount, nor could the AG determine the financial impact of the adjustment that should be made to the accumulated loss. The AG could also not determine the amount to be impaired. Inventory Ditto Maintenance costs Incorrect exchange rates used, recognised in incorrect period, not all recognised in profit and loss, maintenance costs were understated by R282 million, previous years were understated, fair value overstated by R67 million. Irregular expenditure Proper records were not kept, hence the AG could not determine the correct amount. Fruitless and wasteful expenditure Ditto Material uncertainty related to going concern status The net loss is R5.6 billion (2015/6 R R1.5 billion), and the liabilities exceed the assets by R17.8 billion (2015/6 R12.4 billion) The figures for March 31 2016 and 2015 have been restated The accumulated loss for 2016 was amended to R26.1 billion) (R25.9 billion), and the accumulated loss for 2015 was amended to R24.6  billion (R24.4 billion) Duduzile Myeni, the chairperson, was only removed in October 2016. Phumeza Nhantsi, the CFO, who was temporarily seconded from SizweNtsalubaGobodo (SNG) to SAA as interim CFO while she was a director of SNG, and subsequently appointed as CFO in March 2016. Nhantsi and Musa Zwane, the CEO of SAA Technical, were suspended in March 2018 pending a disciplinary hearing. Our SOEs appear to be linked by the rotation of directors and senior executives, or close relationships between external auditors and senior executives. In this vein, it is to be noted that when Nhantsi was a director at SNG, she was the lead engagement partner of Denel SOC Ltd,  and responsible for signing-off the audit of the Denel Group (Denel SOC Ltd), Denel Aviation, Denel Aero structures, and Denel Land Systems. The joint external auditors of the 2015/16 SAA annual report, PwC and Nkonki Inc, only identified irregular expenditure of R5.4 million and fruitless and wasteful expenditure of R7.3 million. They had no other findings, signed an unqualified report, and were satisfied that SAA met the going concern test. A new board was appointed in October 2017, with JB Magwaza as chairman and Vuyani Jarana as CEO. The new board perhaps spoke too soon when they avowed to take “SAA to new heights and are dedicated to returning the airline to financial viability”. It will take a lot more than this. Tough decisions will have to be made, and those responsible for running the airline into the ground should be charged. On July 3 2017 I wrote that the SAA is spiralling out of control, and required at least R44.5 billion to wipe out the accumulated loss and the debt.  SAA continued its downward trajectory, requiring constant government bailouts. Going control test  R million Total assets 15 916   Share capital, reserves, and accumulated loss -17 802 Total liabilities 33 718     Loss for the year -5 569   Net cash outflows from operating and investment activities -2 395 In my view, the current operating model cannot turn the organisation around, and produce enough cash flow to pay finance costs, let alone pay back debt. Unfortunately, the business model is not the sole problem. SAA must urgently address the following: Fixing SAA will take more than ad hoc government bailouts. The AG is commended for having carried out a proper audit of SAA, and for having the courage to reveal the rot. It is time that the directors paid more than lip service to the King III Code on corporate governance, the Companies Act, and the Public Finance Management Act. They need to implement the proper systems to pull the organisation back into line. This may however be too late.