In 2015 the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) in the UK launched a market study of that country’s asset management industry. Its objective was to determine how well the market was working, and whether investors were getting value for money. It focused on questions such as how effective competition was in the industry, whether there was a relationship between the price investors were paying and the performance they were getting, and if asset managers were communicating clear and useful information to their clients. In all of these areas, it identified clear room for improvement. In a final report released in June last year, the FCA raised a number of issues that it felt needed to be addressed. Profit margins Perhaps the most startling was the finding that the average profit margin among the asset managers the regulator sampled was 36%. This is way above the margins enjoyed in almost any other industry. The table below gives an idea of the highest quarterly profit margins reported by some of the UK’s largest companies since 2010: Source: YCharts This shows that the margins being earned by asset managers are substantial. And, as one would expect, this is not restricted to the UK. Just looking at the sample of listed asset managers in South Africa shows that margins are generous here too: Source: ProfileData Price competition It is therefore not surprising that the FCA found that price competition in the industry was weak. “Firms do not typically compete on price, particularly for retail active asset management services,” it noted. The regulator added that while fees charged to institutional investors tended to fall as the size of their investments increased, this was not the case for retail investors. Rather, it found “considerable price clustering” on charges for retail funds, and that the fees charged by active managers have “remained broadly stable” for a decade. “We agree with respondents who said that, in and of themselves, price clustering and broadly stable prices do not necessarily mean that prices are above their competitive level,” the FCA noted. “However, we also found high levels of profitability, with average profit margins of 36% for the firms we sampled. Firms’ own evidence to us also suggested they do not typically lower prices to win new business. These factors combined indicate that price competition is not working as effectively as it could be.” Remedies Having further engaged with the industry, the FCA has now released a set of remedies to address this and other issues. They key issue, it believes, is improving transparency. “The FCA’s Asset Management Market Study found that some charges might not always be visible to retail investors and, even when they were, investors might not pay sufficient attention to charges or understand their impact on investment returns,” the regulator noted. Investors and asset managers in South Africa should pay attention to this, since the South African regulatory regime tends to follow what happens in the UK. It is highly likely that changes introduced there will find their way here. Significantly, the FCA wants all asset managers to show investors everything they are paying in an ‘all-in-fee’. This mustn’t just be expressed as a percentage, but as a ‘pounds and pence’ figure. In South Africa, the Association for Savings and Investment South Africa (Asisa) has already taken steps in this direction through the introduction of the Estimated Annual Cost (EAC) on a number of financial products, showing the full costs a customer is paying. However, expressing these as an actual amount is yet to happen. Tangible information The impact could, and should, be immediate and substantial. An investor may think that they are happy to pay 2.5% for asset management. However, if they have R10 million invested, will they be as willing to hand over R250 000 a year, particularly if they could get a very similar product for R100 000? This could quite easily be their largest annual household expense, and at the moment they hardly realise that they are paying it. Since it is simply deducted from the return they are earning, they don’t see it, and don’t feel it. Putting a number to it, however, will make it more tangible. It should also make them consider whether what they are getting value for that money. It is also possible that the FCA could consider requiring all investment platforms to carry a warning that investors should check what they are paying since costs erode returns. They may also have to provide comparisons with similar funds. Some low-cost providers already do this, but fund managers with particularly steep fee structures will find themselves on the back foot if they are continually compared to more competitively-priced offerings. Nobody is saying that asset managers should not be profitable, but it is hard to get away from the impression that an industry that is supposed to be serving the interests of its clients above all else should be paying more attention to lowering its costs. It is so obviously in the interests of their clients to do so, that not engaging in more competitive pricing is simply incongruous.