The imbalance of knowledge between financial service providers and consumers as well as the requirements for payment long before the value of a service is experienced, means that the insurance industry relies heavily on trust. As new customers enter the financial services market, trust will be essential to secure ongoing loyalty. The complex nature of the financial marketplace can put consumers at a distinct disadvantage when choosing products and services that adequately meet their needs. Therefore, as industry experts, it is important that financial service providers can be relied upon to guide their customers towards making healthy financial decisions. At times, this means putting their customers’ interests ahead of their own – a priority that the Financial Services Board (FSB) seeks to instil through its Treating Customers Fairly (TCF) regulatory approach to consumer protection. According to the principles of TCF, regulated financial firms are required to demonstrate that they conduct business in a manner that takes the needs of customers into account and fosters a relationship of trust. The FSB has broken this mandate up into the following six fairness outcomes: The TCF principals are particularly relevant for low income consumers who, as a result of limited exposure to financial services in the past, have low levels of financial literacy and therefore rely more heavily on service providers delivering on their promises. And, with the introduction of micro-insurance expected later this year, the fair treatment of these individuals is more important than ever. The new Insurance Bill sets out to introduce a legal framework for micro-insurance, which allows for the provision of insurance products to suit the needs of lower income groups. The passing of the bill will provide over 20% of South Africans, who currently lack access to formal financial services, with protection against financial risk. As part of its response to public comments on the Insurance Bill, the National Treasury refers to insurance as the ‘business of promises’ in which a high level of consumer confidence is required in the industry if markets are to develop and grow. This will be particularly important when micro-insurance is introduced, to secure the trust of an entirely new demographic of customer. Lower-income earners often lack confidence when it comes to making financial decisions and can find financial service providers confusing or intimidating. Adopting a TCF approach to the delivery of services will help micro-insurers establish a relationship of trust with new consumer groups by ensuring that their products are simple and meaningful and that they deliver on their promises. Sonja Visser is the CEO of long-term insurance provider African Unity Life.