Here’s what caught our attention on Wednesday: 1. Christo Weise has his say on Steinhoff In a Moneyweb exclusive, ex-Steinhoff chair Christo Wiese said he stands by his previous response, saying he did not tell Steinhoff to cover a margin call for December 2017. In addition, he said he did not have any confrontations with other board members, Dr Johan van Zyl and Dr Steven Booysen, following CEO Markus Jooste’s resignation. Read the full story here. 2. What the World Bank had to say about SA On Tuesday, the World Bank announced its improved 1.4% economic growth forecast for South Africa for 2018. Most of the optimism comes from what South Africans term ‘Ramaphoria’. President Cyril Ramaphosa has made promises to cleanse the country of its corruption, state-owned entity bankruptcy, poverty and a host of other things, which is creating a positive sentiment from the rest of the world. This forecast is however less than National Treasury’s growth projection of 1.5% for 2018 and 1.9% for 2019. 3. Sarb is aiming for a single-point inflation rate The South African Reserve Bank’s (Sarb’s) Monetary Policy Committee said during the monetary policy review on Tuesday that it is aiming for a single-digit inflation target range. Bloomberg reported that the central bank is aiming for inflation to range between 3 and 6%. Also read: SA growth could pick up faster than expected, Sarb says 4. MTN plans to list its Nigerian unit Network service provider MTN plans to list its Nigerian unit in an initial public offering this year and has partnered with Ecobank to expand on its plans to offer mobile services across Africa. MTN CEO Rob Shuter said MTN will provide details and terms of the IPO in the next few months, according to Reuters. 5. Eastern platinum belt under strain According to data complied by Anglo American Platinum the eastern platinum belt is under heavy strain, as 400 cases of social unrest have been discovered which have impacted mining operations since 2016. Reuters reported that these included (among other things) violence arising from job and revenue grievances, and conflicts with rival groups.