In July 2006 Alexander Forbes finalised a settlement with the then Financial Services Board (FSB) that it would pay back R364 million to pension funds under its administration. These refunds were payable because Alexander Forbes acknowledged that it had profited from bulking arrangements that it had made with banks without informing the funds that it was doing so. In total, 1 825 pension funds were entitled to receive compensation. However, nearly 12 years later Moneyweb has learnt that members of hundreds of these funds have still not been paid. Cancelled funds The delay in payment was revealed in the course of Moneyweb’s enquiries into issues surrounding the pension fund cancellation project run by the FSB, which has since become the Financial Sector Conduct Authority (FSCA). This cancellation project has been a controversial issue over many years, after the former deputy registrar of pension funds, Rosemary Hunter, challenged the FSB’s approach in closing hundreds of funds. This matter has gone all the way to the Constitutional Court. Read: Hunter’s extraordinary application in pension fund case The link between the two matters is that at the time that the bulking settlement was reached in 2006, 297 of the pension funds that were owed refunds had already been cancelled. A further nine were cancelled the following year, although applications for their closure had already been submitted before the bulking decision was reached. The FSCA has now revealed that Alexander Forbes has still not paid the bulking refunds due to the members of all 306 of these funds. This is despite the issue of paying refunds to members of cancelled funds first being raised in 2007, and Alexander Forbes having entered into discussions with the regulator in 2008 about how to resolve the matter. “Alexander Forbes approached the FSB with a proposed solution on how best to deal with the payments of bulking proceeds to members of the closed funds who are entitled to such benefits,” explained Olano Makhubela, the acting deputy registrar of pension funds at the FSCA. “Two options were considered – one which enabled Alexander Forbes to make direct payments to members entitled to such benefits subject to the supervision of the FSB, or for the registration of the funds to be reinstated to enable the funds to make such payments. Given the complexity of the matter these options are still being considered to ensure a cost effective payment to members. Alexander Forbes has ring-fenced the related bulking proceeds in a separate account and the account is independently audited.” Delays While it is understandable that paying compensation to members of funds that no longer exist is a complicated issue, the delay of more than a decade is troubling. This is not just because the refunds have not been paid, but that in all this time a decision has not even been reached on how such payment will take place. “We accept that 12 years is too long to find a resolution to this matter,” said Makhubela. “The process has taken longer than necessary.” For its part, Alexander Forbes would only confirm to Moneyweb that it has been “engaging with the FSB to ensure that former members of closed funds receive their share of the bulking settlements”. “Alexander Forbes will not be making any application to have any funds reinstated,” group chief executive Andrew A Darfoor told Moneyweb in a statement. “The registrar is aware of all deregistered funds. Alexander Forbes remains committed, and is working with the FSB on ways to ensure that payments due are made to funds or their former members. This continues to be provided for in full on our balance sheet.” The company did not, however, answer questions as to why this has taken so long, or what has been done to find a solution since the regulator was first approached in 2008. Resolution It is also worth noting that it appears that arrangements have been made as far back as 2008 for Alexander Forbes to compensate individuals who had already left funds that were paid refunds. These members were not compensated by the fund, but directly by Alexander Forbes. The ability of the company to pay individuals outside of pension funds has therefore long been established. This must raise further questions about why there has been such a delay. If Alexander Forbes has already decided that it will not be asking for funds to be reinstated, the only other option is the direct payment of members, so it has to be asked why this has not taken place. Makhubela agrees that a resolution needs to be finalised soon. “We are working on resolving all critical outstanding issues and having an improved system to deal with such complex matters,” he said. “The fact that the funds were cancelled prior to the distribution of the bulking proceeds has complicated the matter and did require legal opinions on how to deal with it. Part of the challenge is finding the most convenient, efficient and safe way to make the refunds to members who are entitled to the bulking proceeds. We will be meeting soon with Alexander Forbes to find a final solution to this matter.”