While I suggested in 2015 that Capitec execs would be reaching for the champagne to celebrate the bank’s impressive growth in primary banking clients, they must surely now have Moët & Chandon on ice versus what might’ve been local sparkling wine back then…. In its 2018 integrated report, Capitec says it now has over 4.5 million primary bank clients, nearly half of its customer base. Put another way, it has as many primary bank clients today as it had total clients at the start of calendar 2013 (it defines primary banking clients as those “who make regular deposits, mainly salaries”). In the past 12 months, it said it’s adding an average of 31 000 primary banking customers of the roughly 100 000 accounts it opens per month. Of course, there is churn in the base (with some accountholders switching away) and within the base (with typical loan clients becoming primary bank customers, for example). Based on numbers disclosed by the bank, it added a net 650 000 primary bank clients out of a total 1.3 million customers in the year to end-February. This means that one out of every two new net customers, was or became a primary bank one. It contends that it has 27% of the primary banking market in South Africa (for which it uses the employed population as a proxy). Source: Capitec 2018 results presentation Of the four full-service banks, only Nedbank discloses granular details of its retail client base. At the end of 2017, it had 2.783 million “main banked” customers, out of a total base of 7.538 million. Nedbank says it has 12.7% market share, using a recent market survey by Consulta. (Using this methodology, Capitec has 20% share, meaning the other three banks split the remaining 67% of the market). The growth in primary clients has been pronounced since it began disclosing the measure in 2012. This disclosure coincided with a specifically-stated strategy in the 2012 integrated report to focus on this segment. It said “the number of transactions that clients perform on the bank system is dependent on whether these clients use the bank as their primary bank. Many clients have bank accounts at more than one bank, but choose one as the primary account into which their salary is deposited and from which all payments are made. This preference is also an indication of the bank: which clients trust, get the best value from, and have the best relationship with.” It stated plainly six years ago: “Capitec Bank regards these clients as the most important to acquire.” This strategy has paid off, and then some. Source: Capitec results disclosures, author’s calculations The bank has recently introduced a new definition: quality banking clients. These are “those clients who have stable inflows into their account and stable product usage over a consecutive three-month period”. It has seen an 18% increase in this segment over the past year. As at end-February, Capitec had 2.6 million quality clients. This is comparable to Nedbank’s entire “main banked” customer base. Primary bank clients (which includes quality clients) perform the most transactions, and therefore generate the most net transaction fee income for the bank. For instance, it says in 2018 that “net transaction fee income from debit orders, of which the majority relates to our quality banking clients, increased by 17% year-on-year (2017: 19%)”. Source: Capitec 2018 results Net transaction fee income for 2018 totaled R5.127 billion, an increase of R1.2 billion from the R3.923 billion in FY2017. At this stage, it equates to 41% of total income but – more importantly – 81% of operating expenses. Its transaction fee income to operating expenses coverage target by 2022? 100%. Ambitious, yes, but certainly not impossible. Hilton Tarrant can still be contacted at hilton@moneyweb.co.za.