The rand firmed on Tuesday as global risk appetite improved and markets appeared to shrug off worries that US-China trade tensions could damage global growth. Stocks ended lower as African Rainbow Minerals shares fell after an attack on its miners that led to six deaths. At 1512 GMT the rand was 0.32% firmer at 11.81 per dollar compared to Monday’s close of 11.85. US President Donald Trump’s administration is expected to announce this week US tariffs on $50-60 billion in Chinese imports. On Tuesday China’s ambassador to the United States said Beijing will take counter-measures of the “same proportion” and scale if Washington imposes further tariffs. The trade war fears had dampened global risk appetite but the rand remains an emerging market favourite following a ratings reprieve by Moody’s last month and data suggesting the continent’s most industrialised country was on track for faster growth. Moody’s affirmed South Africa’s debt at “Baa3”, the lowest rung of investment grade, but changed the country’s credit outlook to stable from negative. “The (central bank) decision to reduce the interest rate in March may slow down the pace of the appreciation in the rand in the near-term,” Nedbank analysts wrote in a note. “We still believe that the current real interest rate is still supportive of persistent foreign capital inflows, which could see the rand being supported further in coming months, although this is not our base case.” The rand has appreciated 7% against the dollar since late December when President Cyril Ramaphosa succeeded Jacob Zuma as head of the ruling African National Congress party. Ramaphosa was appointed head of state following Zuma’s resignation in February. On the bourse, the All Share Index fell 1.1% to 54 864 points. The Top 40 Index was down 1.26% to 48 167 points. African Rainbow Minerals fell 4.63% to R96.71 following the deaths of six of their miners when the bus taking them to work was set alight by a petrol bomb thrown by unknown attackers. “The stock has really been marked down because there is likely negative sentiment due to safety concerns. Mines can be closed and production can be affected,” said Greg Davies, equities analyst at Cratos Wealth. In fixed income, the yield for the benchmark government bond was up 3.5 basis points to 8.015%, reflecting weaker bond prices.