The 12 months to March 31 was generally a good period for income funds. With the local equity indices on average delivering mediocre single-digit returns and property and rand strength weighing heavily on balanced fund returns, the stability of inflation beating income fund returns in general, proved its value to risk-averse investors. Based on Morningstar data, the average income fund returned around 8% for the 12 months, compared to the average low equity balanced fund (funds with up to 40% equity exposure) of under 5% and the average high-equity balanced fund (funds with up to 75% equity exposure) under 4%. Inflation was 4% for the 12 months. However, within the income fund category there was a wide range of outcomes, from 2.2% to 14.7% for the 12 months. It is critical to contextualise that and to understand that all income funds are not equal. Income funds are suitable for investors seeking stable inflation-beating returns with the primary aim of maximising their current income. Investors often ignore the trade-off between the level of income desired and the level of investment risk one is willing to take to achieve it. Not all income funds are equal In assessing investment risk, investors most commonly look at standard deviation of returns but often ignore credit risk, duration and liquidity risks in generating those returns. A fund might offer a juicy and stable yield, but does that justify complacency, or might there be material inherent risk? A key risk in income funds is credit risk – this risk being the chance that the interest and/or capital of an interest-bearing investment may not be repaid. African Bank (Abil) is a case in point. Many money market funds held Abil instruments with very short duration, but because the term of the instruments was longer the blow out in spreads resulted in capital losses. Just looking at the duration would not have highlighted this risk. In assessing income funds, investors should be asking what the credit rating of their fund is. The credit rating of a fund provides an indication as to the credit risk of the fund. Credit ratings could be provided by external rating agencies or by calculating the weighted average credit rating of a fund’s rated investments. It’s important for investors to assess a fund’s credit rating relative to the yield offered by the fund because taking on more credit risk must be compensated for by higher yield. Understanding credit risk and drawdowns Credit risk is important because if a default occurs the fund will lock in a loss, which leads to a drawdown in the fund. This naturally has a severe impact on the ability of the fund to generate future real returns, as the fund must claw back its losses before it can generate positive returns. A fund that manages to generate consistent positive real returns, which when compounded over time, will outperform funds with drawdowns over time. Minimising drawdowns is key to generating long-term real returns. As simple as that. Duration can’t be viewed in isolation In assessing duration risk there are two components that must be considered. The first is the term of an investment, the second is its interest rate and credit spread sensitivity. In assessing term risk, it’s important to consider the term to maturity of an income fund’s underling investments. A key measure to assess is the weighted average life (WAL) of the fund. A fund with a higher WAL also indicates increased risk. Credit risk increases with longer dated investments as there is a longer time-period to wait before the underling investments in the fund matures. Liquidity risk is also increased as it is harder to liquidate longer-dated investments in the market to provide investor’s liquidity. Investors should consider the yield offered on their fund relative to the WAL of a fund’s investments as investors need to be compensated for the increase in term risk. Another aspect of duration risk is interest rate and credit spread sensitivity. Duration indicates how sensitive a fund is to changes in the general level of interest rates in the market. Duration views can be expressed by investments in assets that earn a fixed or floating rate of interest. A fund with a higher duration has a greater possibility of earning higher returns versus a fund with a lower duration. By increasing duration, a fund’s risk increases, and investors need to assess the yield offered relative to the amount of duration a fund has. Investors should consider the yield of the fund per unit of duration to determine the compensation risk for added duration. Credit spread duration is a risk, which is often ignored. A credit spread is the additional return (over a suitable benchmark rate such as three-month Jibar or the R186 government bond) commanded by investors when investing in interest bearing investments. Credit spreads vary in the market over time and indicate the market’s view of the interest rate and economic cycles. Moreover, credit spreads are also affected by the credit quality (credit risk) as well as the term of an investment. A longer-term investment will command a greater credit spread and similarly a lower quality investment commands an additional credit spread to compensate for the increased credit risk. So, when spreads increase… In times of market stress credit spreads can widen, which means that investors are commanding a higher return for the specific investment. By applying bond mathematics, when spreads increase the present value of cash flows are discounted by a higher rate which results in the present value of the investment decreasing. Investors who hold interest bearing instruments whose credit spread has subsequently widened with suffer an unrealised loss (the value of their investment is worth less). This risk is compounded by the increased term of the funds’ investments as the effect will be more pronounced for a longer dated investment versus a shorter dated investment.  This can be seen in funds which held, for example, Steinhoff bonds. A fund with a sizeable portion of longer-dated investments will increase its WAL and thereby expose the fund to increased credit spread duration if credit spreads change. The bottom line In comparing income funds, investors need to be cognisant of not simply chasing yield without considering the risks taken to generate those yields. Everything might turn out well while stable interest rates and/or credit spreads prevail. Caveat emptor – buyers beware. Core to any investment strategy is the focus on generating consistent stable real yields through different interest rate cycles. At Prescient, our Income Provider Fund has consistently managed to generate positive real returns each year since inception and has never delivered negative returns over any rolling three-month period. That dear investors, is peace of mind! Brought to you by Prescient.