Here’s what caught our attention on Tuesday: 1. Everything increases, and it’s not an April Fool’s joke Greetings, April warmly welcomes you into an array of increases. The 15% VAT increase officially kicked in on April 1, alongside the sugar tax increase. For interest’s sake, here’s something to read on how the VAT increase may affect you. Wednesday also sees the increase of petrol and diesel prices, by 72 cents and 65 cents per litre, respectively. This is just a heads-up to watch your spending and fill up tonight. 2. Gold Fields’ new strategies Gold mining company Gold Fields has announced that it will purchase stakes in half of Asanko Gold Ghana, and take a stake in the Canadian miner in a $202.6 million deal. Reuters reported that the deal includes an upfront payment of $165 million on closure of  the transaction and a deferred payment of $20 million. 3. Group Five anticipates big losses Construction company Group Five announced on Thursday that it anticipates its losses to increase by R371 million for the half-year ended, December 31 2017. Moneyweb reported that this comes after Group Five failed to timeously complete a $410 million engineering project with Ghana-based gas power plant, Kpone. Moneyweb also reported that the group postponed its scheduled results release and has fallen “foul” of the JSE listing requirements. 4. Eskom addresses its employment costs The power utility, whose bank balances are in shambles, is coming up with ways to address its employment issue, i.e. not that there are too little employees, but too many. According to Bloomberg, the “bloated workforce”, would mean there are higher costs to the company, which is already struggling with cash flow. Eskom said it will roll out a plan to manage employee headcount and employee costs. 5. Sasfin goes digital Financial services company Sasfin has launched a digital platform to help small- and medium-sized businesses to access the business environment with more ease. The platform, known as B//YOND for Business will enable companies to create and submit applications to multiple stakeholders. Read the full story here.