Poultry producer Astral Foods announced to the market on Thursday that it “now finds itself in a position where it has a chairman who cannot be remunerated”. This followed a general meeting where it asked shareholders to vote on a single special resolution regarding the remuneration of its non-executive chairman, Theunis Eloff. Fewer than half of the shares in issue (48.45%) voted on the resolution and – still – it only achieved a vote of 53.11% in favour (2.36% abstained). The special resolution required support of 75% in order to be passed. This is a most unusual situation and likely the first time shareholders have failed to support remuneration of a chairman of a JSE-listed company. Astral is in this position as it failed to have the special resolution passed at its annual general meeting (AGM) on February 8. At the AGM, only 72.62% of shareholders voted in favour of the special resolution on the remuneration of the chairman. In the notice of the general meeting, Astral said the “required level of support was missed by 2.38% as only 72.62% of shareholders present and by proxy voted in favour of the resolution”. It proposes remuneration for the chair of R1.1 million (excluding VAT) for the current financial year (ending September 30). Eloff was paid R950 000 in 2016 and R1.1 million last year. It argues that “the proposed remuneration is considered to be fair and reasonable and in the best interests of the company” and that it is a “composite fee” meaning the chairman does not receive any other fees for board sub-committees. By comparison, fishing company Oceana Group, with a similar market capitalisation (R11 billion to Astral’s R13 billion) paid its chairman Mustaq Brey R706 000 in 2017. Larger Pioneer Foods (market value of R28 billion) paid its chair KK Combi R869 000 in 2017. In the circular for the general meeting, Astral also made the point that “there is an insufficient number of representative companies in the company’s sector to derive an appropriate benchmark. Accordingly, it is viewed as good practice in South Africa to use a comparator group comprising similar-sized companies, even if these companies do not operate within the company’s sector”. It says that “prior to the recommendation of the proposed chairman’s fee, a detailed benchmarking analysis was performed by our external independent advisors as follows: “In the context of the above analysis the company’s proposed fee was between the median and the upper quartile of the market data for fees paid to non-executive directors of other similar-sized, publicly-listed companies in South Africa. However, in response to the negative vote, and to mitigate the significant risk of not being able to retain a chairman, the company proposes that the remuneration of the chairman remains unchanged from the fee previously approved at the 2017 annual general meeting.” Astral received overwhelming support (over 99% in favour) for its other special resolutions tabled at the AGM, including proposed remuneration for non-executive directors. However, on the non-binding ordinary resolutions on the company’s remuneration policy and its implementation, shareholders were also unhappy. Only 51.98% voted in favour of the policy (out of 63.56% shareholders present) and 48.49% voted to endorse the company’s remuneration implementation report. Given that more than 25% voted against these remuneration resolutions, the company engaged with shareholders via a teleconference on February 22. Only two shareholders (holding 7.6% of voteable shares in Astral) participated in the call, and strangely Astral says “both shareholders indicated that they had in fact voted in favour of the adoption of the remuneration policy and Remuneration Implementation Report and raised no material areas of concern in relation to Astral Foods’ remuneration policy and the Remuneration Implementation Report. It adds that a “recommendation was made by one shareholder for the company to reconsider the hurdle target rates recommended for the allocation of the newly implemented Forfeiture Share Plan”. Also, it notes that “one shareholder, holding approximately 0.20% of voteable shares in Astral Foods, advised the company prior to the telephone conference, that he voted against the Remuneration Policy due to the fact that no targets for the EVA bonus scheme was included in the Integrated Report.” In an announcement to the market, Astral said it would formally table these concerns at its next Human Resources, Remuneration and Nominations Committee meeting  for consideration. As at the end of the 2017 financial year, its largest shareholders were the Government Employees Pension Fund (via the Public Investment Corporation) with 13.03% and clients of Allan Gray (6.05%). Investec Asset Management held over 10% at one stage, although this has reduced to under 5% as at February 14. Following the failure to have the special resolution on its chairman’s remuneration passed at Thursday’s general meeting, Astral says it “will be seeking advice and will consider options available in this instance”. Hilton Tarrant can still be contacted at hilton@moneyweb.co.za.