At the turn of the year, I was in the fortunate position to enjoy the sights and sounds of one of the world’s most fascinating cities: Tokyo. While the vacation was in the pipeline for about two years, I agonised over the extravagance of the trip for quite some time. Would I have to postpone my retirement from 88 to 90? Is a self-proclaimed miser even allowed to take a vacation that doesn’t involve camping in your own backyard? Would I have any credibility as a cheapskate columnist if a Moneyweb reader spotted me and my discounted boarding pass in cattle class? (Note to self: If your aim is to disguise yourself in the land of the rising sun, make sure you emerge from a gene pool other than The Blonde Behemoths.) This column was born because I believe frugal habits underpin sound financial planning. In short, it is about truly grasping the difference between the ability to afford something and the “need” to buy it. Yet, this does not mean that I believe people should hoard as much money as they can and deprive themselves and others of anything that could be considered unnecessary or expensive. Rather, it is about finding a disciplined, balanced approach to saving, spending and investing and understanding how a decision to prioritise one, will impact the other over time. It is only on the mythical pre-trade war island Trump where actions apparently don’t have effects. So yes, I think even cheapskates are allowed an overseas holiday or two-ply toilet paper once in a while. (Separating the sheets is easier than you might think!) Since I suffer from severe allegrophobia, I have always wanted to visit a country that truly understood punctuality. Here in South Africa I have been hospitalised more than once after I arrived at an event at 08:50 only to find out the briefing starts at “09:00 for 09:30”. Despite significant technological advancements, I’m still struggling to set my watch accordingly. Anyhow, Japan did not disappoint. I would have been on time to catch the morning train at least once if I could read the street map, or understood any of the five very friendly Japanese people who tried to help me with English directions. It seems that it is not only Northern Capetonians like myself who use the Queen’s language exclusively for self-defence. While the Japanese are known for their work ethic and diligence, I had to suppress a chuckle when I saw the leaflet with the train schedule for weekends and “horidays”. (As an aside: If sport is not your thing, I can really recommend a visit to Tokyo in December. If 5ºC weather doesn’t cure your running addiction, at least you can look forward to a slow run. The information board next to the Imperial Palace explicitly instructs joggers: “Don’t run too fast.”)  Here are my tips for a memorable and relatively cheap overseas trip: Ultimately however, this vacation highlighted something that is easy to forget: It is the experience of enjoying a foreign country (or even just my own backyard) with truly amazing people that I will remember for the rest of my life. The shared experience, the banter and the memories are some things money can’t buy. (And no, MasterCard is not there for everything else!) Read more of Commandments of a Cheapskate columns: A salary-earner’s pursuit of financial health Rethink your approach to car buying The big decision: What to do with your fortune How to flee from financial FOMO An expensive lesson in mobile downgrading

Do you know the price of milk? A run for my money It’s time to think differently about income and risk