The Dutch Investors’ Association (VEB) yesterday signalled its intent to hold three banks related to Steinhoff responsible for losses incurred by investors since the share price collapse was triggered in December last year. One of these is Absa Bank. The other banks include Commerzbank and Barclays Bank Plc. VEB says Absa was responsible for circulating prospectuses to investors that contained false and misleading statements relating to Steinhoff’s financial position. VEB’s head of Public Affairs, Armand Kersten, told Moneyweb that his organisation has given the bank two weeks to file a response, upon which, a decision will be made regarding filing a lawsuit against Absa in the Netherlands. “This would be a class action law suit in a similar vein to the one we have initiated against Steinhoff. This means that the ‘burden of proof’ is reversed, and Absa will have to prove that its prospectus was not misleading,” said Kersten. Absa, in its capacity as Steinhoff’s JSE Transaction Sponsor, was responsible for “ensuring that the JSE’s listing rules were complied with by Steinhoff,” in a response the bank provided this morning notifying investors it had not yet heard from VEB. VEB pursued a similar case against the bankers of World Online who led the company’s Initial Public Offering (IPO), successfully settling with Goldman Sachs and ABN Amro “for over 100% of damages” said Kersten.  Statement by VEB On 18 April 2018 / The Hague – VEB has notified Commerzbank AG, ABSA Bank Limited and Barclays Bank PLC that it holds them liable for damages incurred by Steinhoff shareholders. Commerzbank AG, ABSA Bank Limited and Barclays Bank PLC acted in distinct and various capacities as ‘Bankers to the Company’, ‘Listing Agent’, and/or ‘Transaction Sponsor’ for the two prospectuses issued by Steinhoff on 7 August and 19 November 2015 respectively. The prospectuses served to accompany a scheme of arrangement and subsequent admission to trading and listing of ordinary shares at the Johannesburg Stock Exchange and the Frankfurt Stock Exchange. The prospectuses were misleading – VEB, from which European Investors is the European brand name, questions whether the prospectuses properly represent Steinhoff’s financial position. VEB concludes that the banks have – in their respective roles and capacities – acted wrongfully in respect of Steinhoff investors. The notice issued on the banks this 18 April 2018, is an invitation to them to consult with VEB about an amicable settlement, failing which VEB may file a class action law suit under Dutch process law against the banks. Statement by Absa Bank We have noted press reports that VEB (the Dutch Investors Association) has indicated that it has notified Absa and two other banks that it is holding them liable for losses incurred by Steinhoff shareholders. Absa has not received any notification from VEB in this regard. For clarity, Absa Bank Ltd was the JSE Transaction Sponsor to Steinhoff International Holdings Limited (“Steinhoff South Africa”). Absa’s role was limited to ensuring that the JSE’s listing rules were complied with by Steinhoff SA, the relevant JSE-listed company. Absa’s mandate specifically did not include the compilation or review of the financial statements of Steinhoff South Africa or any other Steinhoff company.