The rand weakened by as much as one% on Friday, hit by returning demand for the dollar and rising US treasury yields that prompted profit taking after the local currency’s recent rally. Stocks nudged higher with Steinhoff International and British American tobacco among the better performers. At 1500 GMT the rand was 1.1% weaker at 12.09 per dollar from a close of 11.96 overnight. Bonds also weakened, with the yield on the benchmark 2026 paper adding 3.5 basis points to 8.04%. The unit, along with other emerging market (EM) currencies, was weighed down by end-of-week dollar demand, while some local traders opted to close positions to avoid losses in low liquidity conditions. “The stronger dollar has been the main trigger. There’s not much happening in EM today, and on a Friday there’s a lot of position squaring and that’s weighing on the rand,” said currency dealer at TreasuryOne Andre Botha. The dollar was up 0.42% at 1500 GMT against a basket of major currencies, while the two-year US Treasury yield at 2.449%, its highest level since around September 2008. In the equities market, the Johannesburg all share index rose 0.1% to 57 581 points, while the benchmark top 40 index inched 0.07% higher to 50 765 points. Embattled retailer Steinhoff International, which held its much anticipated annual general meeting, pared gains after earlier rising to R3.23. It closed 1.95% higher to R2.61 after it said it was in talks with creditors about restructuring its debt. Steinhoff, which runs chains such as Poundland and Mattress Fir, is fighting for survival after discovering holes in its accounts. The scandal has wiped billions off its stock market value and triggered a cash crunch. Read: Steinhoff pleas for investor support to save ‘burning building’ “They say that they will have their results finalised by December. It is a year later but at least we know when to expect audited results,” said an equities trader at Independent Securities Vasili Girasis. Tobacco company British American Tobacco recovered slightly from Thursday’s slump when weak results from Philip Morris in the US dented cigarette makers. It closed 1.17% higher to R626.25.