Here’s what caught our attention on Thursday: 1. Steinhoff’s Van Zyl resigns There’s more change at the troubled retailer as non-executive director Johan Van Zyl has handed in his resignation. Van Zyl resigned on Wednesday, two days before the group’s annual general meeting. Bloomberg reported that the sub-committee that Van Zyl led will be dissolved, as a new supervisory board will be appointed at Friday’s meeting. Listen: Questions that need answering at Steinhoff’s AGM 2. Rebosis CEO resigns The CEO of Rebosis Property Fund, Andile Mazwai, resigned days before the group releases its interim results. Mazwai will be replaced by the company’s founder and its former CEO, Sisa Ngebulana. Ngebulana told Moneyweb that Mazwai’s resignation was discussed with the board and came as a result of his different strategic approach to that of the board. In 2017 Rebosis lost more than 30% of its share price and delivered negative total returns. 3. Pick n Pay annual results Retailer Pick n Pay released full-year results for 2018 on Thursday, and reported improved growth and performance compared with 2017. Headline earnings per share increased by 7.1%, to 276.98 cents per share. Dividend per share also increased by 7.1% to 188.80 cents per share. Pick n Pay said in a statement that its new sales strategy delivered strong sales growth in the final quarter. 4. Clicks annual results Clicks released results for the six months ended 28 February 2018 and reported that consumers are still driven by health and beauty products, as the category picked up 14.3%, with improved margins, strong cash flows and better returns for shareholders. Diluted headline earnings per share is also up 14.8% and a dividend of 102.5 cents per share was declared. 5. Pioneer Food trading update For the six months ended March 31 2018, Pioneer Foods reported ‘credible’ performance, as reflected in its trading statement. There was both margin and volume growth, despite “the negative outcome of the purchase position on maize” and fruit exports’ poor performance. Adjusted headline earnings per share is expected to fall between 305.5 and 329.9 cents per share.