Past performance is no guarantee of future results. We’ve all heard this oft-repeated phrase from our money managers or in financial market circles. Essentially the phrase is intended to warn investors to moderate their expectations as inflation-beating returns may not be repeated as markets fall and rise. Money managers who are quick to find refuge in the phrase, often neglect to mention that they play an important role when placing investors’ money. That’s the role of risk management. I’m not talking about the power to predict the future, it’s more about fund managers conducting research, factoring a degree of risk and scepticism to make informed investment decisions. Granted – financial markets are synonymous with unexpected events and risk management cannot anticipate how such events can be destructive and destroy shareholder value. However, the conduct of fund managers after Steinhoff’s own admission of accounting fraud and the shady dealings by Resilient Reit directors has not placed SA’s R4 trillion fund management industry in good light. Repeating how fund managers missed the red flags in Steinhoff and how some relied only on Markus Jooste’s larger-than-life personality rather than conducting their own research, would be futile. This is well documented. Poor investment decisions are hard to swallow especially at a time when management fees charged by fund managers and brokerages remain relatively high. Not only are they entrusted with managing money, but fund managers have a fiduciary duty to protect money, critically analyse financial results, and make sure their funds comply with regulations. But are investors and pensioners getting punked? Let’s use Resilient companies – including Resilient itself, sister companies Fortress, Nepi Rockcastle and Greenbay Properties – as an example. To recap: Resilient companies face damaging allegations of using questionable accounting policies, extending loans to its black economic empowerment partners and management buying a large volume of shares to artificially boost earnings, dividend payments and inflate net asset values (NAVs). These scathing allegations were ventilated by asset manager 36ONE, stockbroker Navigare and independent sell-side research house Arqaam Capital in their own reports. A coterie of fund managers repeatedly questioned why Resilient companies traded at sky-high premiums to their NAVs (of between 35% and 80%) despite the quality and growth of earnings and property portfolio not justifying it. Regrettably, other fund managers displayed a herd mentality, opting to heavily back Resilient companies, which guaranteed managers inflation plus 5% returns or annualised returns north of 15% for many years. A fund manager once told me that if you wanted to outperform the benchmark FTSE/SA Listed Property Index (comprising 20 of the JSE’s biggest real estate stocks), all it took was backing Resilient companies, which makes up more than 40% of the index. Some investment houses – including Absa, Metope and even the custodian of government pensioners the Public Investment Corporation – took it a step further, taking overweight positions in Resilient, Nepi Rockcastle, Fortress, and Greenbay. The houses each had a combined weighting of about 40% and 50% in Resilient companies, resulting in bruising loses for investors given the more than R150 billion has been wiped off the four companies’ market capitalisation so far this year. Read more: Whipped investment funds are sticking with Resilient So much for relying on past performance to replicate future returns. Essentially, fund managers put their eggs in one related property group basket, which is the antithesis of risk management and the philosophy of diversification. It leaves investors vulnerable to destructive events, as seen in the disastrous performance tables in the first quarter of 2018. Asked to justify their large Resilient holdings, most fund managers talk about relying on a three-year performance and how the dog ate their homework. Investors must ask fund managers tough questions about how their money is allocated. Their reliance (solely) on interviews with management to make investment decisions is clumsy. It’s time to revert to the old way of conducting research and having a degree of scepticism. I bet you that some fund managers are now going through financial statements with a fine tooth comb, something that should have happened long before shareholders were burnt.