Over the course of 2017 the FTSE/JSE All Share Index gained 21.0%. However, the point has been made repeatedly that a very large chunk of this was the contribution of a single stock. Naspers, which is by far the largest constituent of the Alsi at over 19.0%, finished the year 71.8% up. That meant that it was responsible for more than half of the market return. This makes things pretty difficult for asset managers who benchmark their performance against a broad market index. As the results from the latest S&P Indices Versus Active (SPIVA) scorecard show, only 4.08% of South African equity funds beat the S&P South Africa Domestic Shareholder Weighted (DSW) Index in 2017. Read: Is your equity fund manager beating the benchmark? The issue for managers is that the Alsi or the S&P South Africa DSW Indices are perhaps not fulfilling the role of what a good benchmark should do. They are simply too highly concentrated. A good benchmark is effectively a portfolio that best represents the market. That is why market cap-weighted indices have been popular, since they are a good illustration of how the market as a whole is performing. However, on a market such as the JSE, they are not necessarily a good indication of how unit trusts should be performing. This is because any asset manager following good risk management principles is very unlikely to put one fifth of their entire portfolio into a single stock. Using a benchmark where this is the case is therefore not comparing like with like. The problem also does not end just with Naspers. “Drilling down further, the top five shares in the Alsi by market cap at the end of February 2018 – Naspers, Richemont, BHP Billiton, Anglo American and Standard Bank – make up just over 40% of the index,” points out Morningstar associate investment analyst, Michael Kruger. “The South African stock market can therefore be regarded as very concentrated. This is especially true when compared to other developed markets such as those in the United States, where the largest stock, Apple Inc, makes up only 4% of the S&P 500.” For this reason, a number of managers are looking to change to using capped indices as their benchmarks. These limit the weighting any single share can have the index, usually to 10%. “I think capping makes sense from a risk management point of view,” says Kruger. “Last year a lot of managers underperformed when Naspers was up nearly 72%, and a lot of people are pointing to that and saying active management doesn’t add value. But from a risk management point of view, it makes sense for mangers not to be holding the full weight of Naspers.” The recently-published Alexander Forbes Manager Watch survey, which focuses on institutional funds, noted that 12 out of the 51 equity portfolios it covers changed their benchmark to the FTSE/JSE Capped Shareholder Weighted Index (SWIX) All-Share Index during 2017. Read: Do you know which benchmark your fund manager is using? Kruger expects to see more managers going this way. “I think 2017 was a bit of a tipping point,” he says. “A lot of managers we talk to are moving to a capped benchmark, although it takes time to go through the actual process. But I would expect more managers to move to that benchmark.” Fairtree Capital was one of the first asset managers to adopt the Capped SWIX. As fund manager Rademeyer Vermaak told Moneyweb last year: “This is not at all a view on Naspers as a company, but the purpose of a benchmark should be a diversified portfolio and it shouldn’t be exposed to a single stock to such a large extent.” Read: Solving the Naspers problem A concern this has created for investors, however, is that it may appear that asset managers are simply changing their benchmarks to suit their own purposes. Particularly if they are charging performance fees, they could be criticised for trying to find a benchmark that’s easier to beat. However, it is important to recognise that markets do change over time, and a benchmark has to be relevant. Many managers changed from using the Alsi to the SWIX at a time when resource stocks dominated the JSE and made up more than 50% of the index. They recognised at the time that it wasn’t appropriate for any manager to be that heavily exposed to a single, highly-cyclical sector. Similarly, they are now looking for another alternative as both the Alsi and the SWIX have become too influenced by one company. “I think managers are doing it for the right reasons,” says Kruger. “They are focusing on risk management, rather than just that they are underperforming the benchmark. So I think that capping makes a lot of sense.”