A multi-billion pound merger between British supermarket Sainsbury’s and Asda shook up retail stocks on Monday while European benchmarks rose, on track to end the month of April with a gain. The pan-European STOXX index rose 0.1% while Germany’s DAX gained 0.3%, buoyed by investors’ improved risk appetite as tensions eased between North and South Korea, and companies delivered strong earnings figures. The STOXX was on course for a 3.8% gain for the month, after suffering losses in February and March. In Europe all eyes were on Sainsbury’s, whose shares shot up at the open, trading up 14.9% by 0828 GMT after the British supermarket to buy Walmart’s Asda for about 7.3 billion pounds ($10 billion) to create Britain’s biggest supermarket group by market share. The stock was on track for its best one-day gain ever. “The merger, if successful, creates a retail giant in the UK with enough procurement and distribution scale to dominate food retail and challenge Amazon in non-food,” said Berenberg analysts. Walmart’s scale, Argos e-commerce capabilities and cross fulfilment synergies (between food and non-food) potentially challenge Amazon’s e-commerce dominance in the UK, they added. Tesco, whose position as UK leader in terms of market share would be overtaken by the new merged group, tumbled 1.3% on the news. Morrisons also fell 1.3%. The reaction among European retailers was more mixed, however, with France’s Carrefour gaining 0.4% and Casino rising 1.1% while Ahold Delhaize declined 0.7%. In other deal news, Deutsche Telekom shares rose 1.5% to the top of the DAX after the German firm clinched a $26 billion deal to merge T-Mobile US and Sprint. AccorHotels rose to the top of France’s CAC 40, up 1.6% after the hotel chain agreed to buy rival Movenpick Hotels & Resorts for $567 million. In results-driven moves, the world’s biggest advertising group WPP surged up 9% after reporting forecast-beating sales in its first results without founder Martin Sorrell. The agency’s gains boosted the pan-European media sector up 1%. Financials, the most sensitive to investors’ risk appetite, were the biggest driver of the STOXX. One drag on the banks sector was Sweden’s SEB, which tumbled 3.8% after reporting first-quarter profit below market expectations as cautious corporate customers and a seasonal slowdown hampered earnings. French construction materials firm Imerys also fell 5.2% after reporting results. Overall Europe’s first-quarter results season has kicked off relatively weakly, particularly compared to the first quarter of 2017 which saw strong growth. Earnings have surprised negatively, on average, in the banking sector, while commodity-related sectors have reported surprisingly strong results thanks to higher materials prices, according to Goldman Sachs. Societe Generale analysts struck a note of caution about investors’ high expectations of earnings. “Optimistic consensus earnings growth for the next three years could be a source of disappointment,” they wrote in a note entitled “Reality check”.