Here’s what caught our attention on Wednesday: 1. SAA needs a capital injection desperately State-owned entity South African Airways (SAA) is really struggling to keep its finances afloat. Chief executive Vuyani Jarana said the entity needs a capital injection now, and has started discussions with National Treasury for an open credit line. Reuters reported that Jarana said SAA would need about R5 billion this year to pay debts and to cover operational costs. The entity has not generated a profit since 2011. 2. Steinhoff debacle spreads to the race course Public Protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane opened up a public hearing into the maladministration of horse racing in Gauteng and seeks to uncover the role of former Steinhoff CEO, Markus Jooste, in this regard. Racing and gaming company Phumelela has been implicated in the debacle, for allegedly transferring racetracks to the public company under what is being called “questionable and unlawful” terms, Sportingpost.co.za reported. 3. Carbon tax legislation Government is looking to implement the long-awaited Carbon Tax, which targets all carbon-emitting resources such as gases and fuels, in the beginning of 2019. First proposed in 2010, the second draft of the Carbon Tax Bill was only published in December 2017, and is still going through the public commenting process. As such Natalie Napier, partner at Hogan Lovells, thinks there’s still a way to go to getting it implemented. Listen: Consumers to bear the brunt of new carbon tax 4. Pork industry let down by listeria South Africa’s pork industry has taken a blow which could exceed R1 billion, since the listeria virus affected all ready-to-eat meat products. Prices of pork fell and the market moved away from it due to the listeria scare. Moneyweb reported that prices went down by at least 40% in the last few months. 5. Saftu threatens to shut SA down on Wednesday The South African Federation of Trade Unions (Saftu) is calling for a national shutdown on Wednesday, in protest of new labour laws and the national minimum wage. Saftu is unhappy with the amendments to the Basic Conditions of Employment Amendment Act and the proposed R20-an-hour national minimum wage, calling it “the biggest attack on workers since the end of apartheid.”