Late payments can be extremely frustrating for any business. First of all, your business doesn’t have the money it has earned and needs to be operational. This can make it hard to pay suppliers and employees – let alone realise your growth ambitions. And secondly, you waste a huge amount of time chasing payments, which is a massive drain on resources. And yet they remain a scourge for the small business owner: for many, it’s a feature of daily life. Xero’s research indicates that in 2017, South Africa’s SMEs spent 1.3 days a month pursuing delinquent invoices – and that 48% of entrepreneurs worry about overdue payments and cash flow on a regular basis. If you’re running a company in South Africa, it can be easy to write late payments off as a fact of life. It doesn’t need to be this way. Keep these tips front of mind and you’re more likely to turn late payments into a thing of the past. Starting a productive payment partnership Prevention is better than a cure, and the beginning of a new business relationship is an excellent time to reinforce your attitude towards late payments. This is partly about negotiation and partly about being organised. Outline your dos, don’ts, and red lines: which payment terms suit your needs and interests, and which dates are at the outer limits of acceptability. Don’t forget to also take care of the technical side of things. Just making sure you’re added to your customer’s system – with all phone numbers, backup numbers, and addresses accurately stored – will already make a significant difference. Often, a business’s physical location and financial address will vary, so ensuring that your customers have as much information reduces the risks of payment delays. Ask for a main point of contact should any issues arise – and include a secondary point of contact should they be on holiday. Annual leave can be surprisingly disruptive for suppliers. Furthermore, ensure you know what’s going out and when for your clients – are they on quarterly or annual payment terms? Is their year-end December or April? Understanding their payment calendar goes a long way in uncovering when potential budget restrictions could arise. Deadline redlines Naturally, sometimes it doesn’t matter how much you do to ensure prompt payments – overdue invoices happen anyway, and when they do, it’s often very awkward. Nobody likes asking for money, even if it’s rightfully theirs. So how do you get paid? An easy way to relieve this pressure is to use automated systems: some accounting software platforms such as Xero will issue emails instantly when payments are due.This ensures that customers know when they need to pay without forcing you to have several difficult conversations with the finance team. This will reduce your administrative burden and free up time for more commercially important tasks. Beyond improving your technology, it’s essential to take responsibility for your payments process. It’s in your interest to know as much about your incomings and outgoings as possible. It’s also worth spending more time on customers who habitually pay late. Here, a carrot-and-stick approach can be particularly effective: offer incentives to pay on time – and if they’re persistently overdue on their invoices, shorten their terms. Most importantly, work on your invoicing processes to maximise efficiency and minimise the impact on cash flow. Having firm procedures in place from the very beginning helps avoid ambiguity, confusion, and delinquency later on. Late payments are a perennial nuisance for small businesses, but they can be mitigated. Make the effort to connect with your customers and set out your deadlines – and red lines – clearly and your entire company will benefit. Colin Timmis is the head of Accounting SA, Xero.