The South African Reserve Bank (Sarb) has confirmed that Capitec meets all prudent requirements set out by the industry body. “As part of our mandate, we monitor the safety and soundness of all banks, including Capitec Bank Limited. According to all the information available, Capitec is solvent, well capitalised and has adequate liquidity. The bank meets all prudential requirements,” the Sarb said in response to questions from Moneyweb. The Sarb’s response comes after Viceroy Research published a report on the bank, alleging that Capitec is a “loan shark with massively understated defaults masquerading as a community microfinance provider”.  In the report, Viceroy stated that the Sarb and Minister of Finance should immediately place the bank under curatorship. SARB response appears to validate Capitec based on information obtained from Capitec. Our research suggests that Capitec data is flawed, and we believe accounts cannot be relied upon. We believe an investigation, at a minimum, is warranted. $CPI #JSEhttps://t.co/5A0n53x3jD https://t.co/QssIL4llPK — Viceroy (@viceroyresearch) January 30, 2018  The researchers allege Capitec is fabricating new loans and collections or re-financing R2.5 to R3 billion in principal per year by issuing new loans to defaulting clients. “As a consequence of re-financing delinquent loans, Viceroy believes Capitec’s loan book is massively overstated. Viceroy’s analysis against competitors suggests an impairment/write-off impact of R11 billion will more accurately represent the delinquencies and risk in Capitec’s portfolio.” Read: Viceroy takes aim at Capitec In a Sens statement, Capitec refuted the report, advising shareholders that it had not been approached by Viceroy prior to the publication of the report. “We believe our corporate governance is strong and our communications and disclosures are, and always have been transparent, clear and to the point. On the face of it, the report is filled with factual errors, material omissions in respect of legal proceedings against Capitec and opinions that are not supported by accurate information”. It also committed to providing a detailed response later today. Related: Identity of individuals behind Viceroy Research revealed Aspen begins freefall as rumours circle Viceroy warns against speculation as Reits dive