The total amount of money invested in South African collective investment schemes is around R2 trillion. The overall market capitalisation of all the exchange-traded products listed on the JSE at the end of December was, however, just R85 billion. In other words, exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and exchange-traded notes (ETNs) make up just a fraction of all the assets in local investment products. Unit trusts remain, by far, the most popular vehicle for South Africans. This is quite different to the US where ETFs command a much larger market share, and continue to grow rapidly. At the end of November last year, US mutual funds (unit trusts) had assets under management of $18.6 trillion. ETFs had $3.3 trillion. There are regular discussions in the industry about whether ETFs in South Africa will reach similar levels of penetration. Can they show the same sort of growth that they have elsewhere in the world? Some argue that we won’t see this trend to the same extent here as index funds are naturally limited by the nature of the JSE. Since it is a small, concentrated market, the JSE does not lend itself to index-tracking quite as well as others that are far broader and more diverse. This argument even appears to be supported by a deeper analysis of the local industry. Unlike almost all other markets, the largest ETFs in South Africa are not equity funds. They are Absa’s NewGold and NewGold Platinum funds. Source: etfSA As this table shows, four of the ten largest ETFs in South Africa are precious metal funds. Three more track international indices. Only three reference the local equity market. This is completely different to the US, where the five largest ETFs all track a Wall Street Index. Three of them reference the S&P 500. You have to go to number nine on the list to find a bond fund, and number 21 before reaching the largest commodity fund. To take this analysis further, the largest ETF issuers in the US are BlackRock’s iShares, and Vanguard. The former has only five commodity funds in its total suite of 347 products. Vanguard has none. In South Africa, however, the largest local ETF issuer is Absa Capital. By far the bulk of its assets are held in its three commodity products. Source: etfSA The value of Absa’s assets under management is almost double that of Satrix, which is by far the largest issuer of equity funds. This illustrates quite clearly how the local market has a very different character to that in the US. It’s worth asking how much of this is due to the structure of the JSE? Are local equity ETFs just not compelling enough because they are not broadly diversified, and because they expose investors to high levels of single stock risk due to how Naspers dominates the local market? This must be part of it, but since it’s quite a sophisticated argument it’s unlikely that it’s a primary consideration for retail investors. The far more likely explanations are appetite and access. In general, pure equity funds are becoming less popular in South Africa. Over the last decade unit trust investors have shown a very clear preference for multi-asset, or balanced offerings. There are simply no fully diversified, multi-asset ETFs. Absa has listed two products that give both equity and bond exposure, but they are very simple and have never attracted a lot of interest. Passive managers have therefore realised in the last few years that if they truly want to compete in the South African market, they need to have a balanced unit trust offering. That is what investors are most interested in, and they are seeing some success in this space. The largest index-tracking balanced fund, the Nedgroup Investments Core Diversified Fund, was launched in 2009 and already has assets under management of R7.0 billion. The second issue is how investors access the funds they use. The bulk of money going into the South African industry comes through linked investment service providers (LISPs), and these platforms don’t support ETFs. Passive providers have therefore increasingly begun replicating whatever they offer as an ETF in unit trust form so that they can get these products onto the country’s big LISPs. This makes them far more accessible to many investors. What this suggests is that it is possible that the local ETF industry won’t show the growth that has been seen in the US. It may well be the case that commodity funds continue to dominate here. That doesn’t mean that index-tracking is not viable in South Africa, however. It is just far more likely to show growth in the unit trust space.