With increasing pressure on companies to examine their environmental impact, business leaders are being forced to take action. Today, companies have to incorporate environmental sustainability and sound business practices into their daily operations – and will likely face future penalties if no tangible action is taken. The challenge, however, is that while awareness may be growing among executive leadership, it is ultimately employees who can make the biggest impact in the long run. This is why any environmental sustainability initiative needs to start from the ground up, or the shop floor, so to speak. Sumesh Ramakrishnan of SmartMatta, a division of Barloworld Logistics that develops environmental solutions for companies, says that boosting employee engagement and awareness around this issue is critical. “Sustainability is a huge issue at the moment, and how companies choose to act now will undoubtedly affect their future growth in a very real way,” explains Ramakrishnan. “At the moment, most efforts toward achieving sustainability are happening in a silo, without the direct involvement and buy-in of employees.” This silo’d approach, he argues, is severely limiting the potential success and impact of sustainability initiatives, particularly with regards to waste management and recycling efforts. According to Ramakrishnan, many companies are working hard to increase their recycling and reduce their environmental footprint, but are becoming frustrated at their lack of progress. This is primarily because companies are failing to drive behavioural change from within. “Companies essentially need to start with their people, and drive awareness through targeted and interactive training programmes,” he adds. Boosting the bottom line In addition to achieving sound business practices, there are numerous financial benefits to be enjoyed for companies that invest in training employees around environmental sustainability. According to SmartMatta, trained employees lead to the recovery of more recyclables, which in turn leads to higher rebates. Indeed, companies can secure as much as a 30% increase in rebates from recyclables, which means that their overall waste management fee actually decreases. There are also attractive tax incentives for companies that offer learnerships: companies can receive up to R40 000 in tax relief (per learner) for completed accredited learnerships, notes Ramakrishnan. “For a company seeking profit uplift, this type of incentive could potentially turn the entire operation around,” he says. A tailored approach Arguably, the successful implementation of company-wide environmental sustainability programmes requires a customised and highly interactive approach. The unique challenges that lie within every company must be carefully addressed, and awareness is best instilled through repetition, weekly meetings, targeted internal marketing and educational content and environmental learnerships. “Employees need to understand and appreciate the cost of waste management versus the monetary and environmental value achieved through recycling,” adds Ramakrishnan. “Formal training can deepen employee understanding, enhance skills development within an organisation and also achieve key cost reductions through smarter waste management practices.” To date, both companies and individuals have benefited from tailored SmartMatta academy programmes, which have tackled projects within water and energy savings as well as personal and financial development within the environmental sphere. For example, one project saw up to 400 unemployed women empowered through education and training. “This was achieved by turning inexperienced waste pickers into formally trained ‘waste entrepreneurs’,” says Ramakrishnan. Brought to you by Barloworld Logistics.