Forensic consultant Paul O’Sullivan and his former associate Melissa Naidu were found not guilty on charges of extortion, intimidation and kidnapping in the Randburg Magistrate’s Court on Friday. The case relates to an interview they conducted with the complainant, Cora van der Merwe, in October 2015. Van der Merwe at the time worked as a cost consultant for former personal injury lawyers Ronald Bobroff and Partners (RBP), which hired O’Sullivan to investigate the leaking of information from the law practice. Van der Merwe later admitted that she sent the information to then-Moneyweb journalist Tony Beamish and considered herself to be a whistleblower. After the court finished delivering its judgement O’Sullivan, addressing journalists, vowed to send prosecutor Advocate Jabulani Mlotshwa to prison. Listen: Magistrate Ndivhuwo Sethusha said the State failed “dismally” to prove the accused’s guilt on any of the charges. Too much time had lapsed between the incident in October 2015 and the taking of Van der Merwe’s statement at the end of 2016 and the police investigation was done poorly, she said. Sethusha said Van der Merwe was a single witness and as such her evidence had to be approached with caution. It had to be consistent and reliable in all material instances, which it wasn’t. Van der Merwe changed her story during her evidence and did not explain her actions on the day of the incident to the satisfaction of the court. Van der Merwe was inconsistent and evasive in answering questions in court, she found. She rejected Van der Merwe’s evidence that she was taken from the Bobroff offices to O’Sullivan’s on the fateful day without her consent. She said Van der Merwe could have spoken out to colleagues, security staff or even members of the public and had more than one opportunity to phone the police. She did nothing of the sort and the only inference is that she went with the accused with her consent. She said a video recording of the interview showed a relaxed atmosphere and Van der Merwe did not look fearful or as if she was being restrained. Her actions to send her employer’s information to a journalist were malicious and unlawful, since a journalist is no relevant authority for a protective disclosure, the court found. Sethusha said the charge sheet did not disclose the penalty on the charge of intimidation and no causal link was proven between the alleged threat and the advantage the accused allegedly acquired with regard to the charge of extortion. Sethusha found O’Sullivan and Naidu to have testified well in chief and under cross-examination. Their credentials as forensic consultants with the right to investigate fraud and corruption were not challenged, she said. Therefore she could not find that their investigation was done unlawfully, Sethusha said. She said the testimony that the prosecution was malicious was irrelevant and she would therefore not deal with it. She did say that it only came to her knowledge late in the trial that O’Sullivan laid charges against Mlotshwa in 2014, long before the events that led to this trial. Moneyweb was not able to reach Mlotshwa for comment. Read more on the case: I did not kidnap her, Paul O’Sullivan testifies O’Sullivan told me to ‘act normally’ – Bobroff whistleblower Prosecutor acting in bad faith, says O’Sullivan