Steinhoff International Holdings NV may receive a fine from the Frankfurt securities exchange after the scandal-hit retailer said it would miss a Wednesday deadline to submit audited 2017 financial results. The exchange’s sanctions committee, an independent body, can impose a fine of as much as 1 million euros if a listed entity violates license obligations, a spokesman for operator Deutsche Boerse AG said in an emailed response to questions, while declining to comment on specific companies. One of those requirements is to report earnings within a set time frame. Steinhoff failed to publish 2017 results as scheduled last month after Deloitte LLP didn’t sign off on the accounts. The owner of Conforama in France and Mattress Firm in the US went on to say it had uncovered financial irregularities, leading Chief Executive Officer Markus Jooste to resign and triggering a more than 80 percent crash in the share price. PwC has been hired by the company to investigate the problem. Trading uninterrupted While the probe is ongoing, Steinhoff won’t publish the accounts by a January 31 deadline, the retailer said in a statement Tuesday. Even so, the shares will continue to trade in Frankfurt and Johannesburg and the company will provide a progress update as soon as possible. A spokeswoman for Steinhoff didn’t immediately respond to a request for comment about the prospect of a fine. The 54-year-old retailer moved its primary listing to Frankfurt from Johannesburg at the end of 2015, while keeping a secondary registration in the South African city. Steinhoff trades on the German bourse’s Prime Standard, where companies have to file quarterly reports. Johannesburg’s stock exchange will take its lead from Frankfurt when deciding how to respond to the company’s failure to report earnings, said John Burke, the JSE’s director of listings. Separately, Steinhoff’s Johannesburg-listed bonds, valued at R6.8 billion could be suspended, Business Day reported last week. © 2018 Bloomberg L.P