Here’s what caught our attention on Tuesday: Eskom’s suspended CFO, Anoj Singh, handed in his letter of resignation on Monday evening before he was due to face the music at the inquiry into state capture at Eskom on Tuesday. Others implicated in questionable dealings at the power utility – which currently finds itself in a serious spot of financial bother – such as Lynne Brown, Tshediso Matona and Brian Molefe have already appeared before the inquiry. Singh will be under the microscope on Tuesday afternoon. The World Economic Forum (WEF) in Davos, Switzerland, starts on Tuesday. The South African delegation is led by Deputy President Cyril Ramaphosa, who joins the likes of US President Donald Trump – whose attendance this year has mouths talking – to debate matters under the theme theme, Creating a Shared Future in a Fractured World. The Black Business Council, which is part of the SA delegation, said it is confident about South Africa having potential for growth. Ramaphosa has the latest Eskom board reshuffle for reassurance but confidence levels in South Africa remain at all-time lows… Newly-elected secretary general Ace Magashule has been implicated in a dairy-farm scandal in Vrede in the Free State, because of deals he made with the Gupta family. The story came to the fore back in 2013. It’s alleged that Magashule diverted millions of rands to the Guptas instead of using it for an empowerment project for small black farmers in Vrede, in the Free State. Magashule was premier of the Free State at the time. On Monday he dodged questions from the media on his role in the whole debacle and said investigations should be left to the National Prosecuting Authority. Social Development Minister Bathabile Dlamini is in the firing line again on Tuesday, for her role in the social grants saga. On Monday, Dlamini was quizzed on her recommendation that certain people should be appointed to run workstreams at the South Africa Social Security Agency. The workstreams cost the department over R40 million and were deemed irregular by National Treasury. EWN reported that Dlamini has rejected the claims of her role in these workstreams. The state-owned freight transport and logistics company will answer to members of Parliament on Tuesday, after directors of the company failed to appear before Parliament’s standing committee on public accounts in December. Transnet must answer to alleged violations of the Public Finance Management Act 1999 and for contractual deviations and expansions for the 2016/2017 financial year, Engineering News reported.