Wall Street was set to start the week slightly lower as a US government shutdown entered its third day, while investors assessed a flurry of multi-billion corporate mergers. The Senate is set to vote at midday on Monday, following failed attempts by Democrats and Republicans to strike a deal on Sunday to fund government operations. “It’s ‘Been there, done that’. We know they are actually going to get their act together and reach a deal. But the economic impact depends on how long it lasts,” said Scott Brown, chief economist at Raymond James in St. Petersburg, Florida. Investors also focused on a spate of deals, particularly following the recent enactment of corporate tax cuts. Juno Therapeutics rose about 27% in premarket after Celgene agreed to buy the biotech for about $9 billion in cash. Celgene was down 1.22%. Shares in US hemophilia specialist Bioverativ soared 63% after French healthcare group Sanofi agreed to buy the company for $11.6 billion. Insurer AIG said it would buy reinsurer Validus Holdings for $5.56 billion. Validus was up 45%. At 8:40am ET (1340 GMT), Dow e-minis were down 49 points, or 0.19%, with 23 251 contracts changing hands. S&P 500 e-minis were down 0.75 points, or 0.03%, with 108 775 contracts traded. Nasdaq 100 e-minis were down 0.25 points, or -0%, on volume of 27 852 contracts. The S&P 500 and the Nasdaq notched record closing highs on Friday, as investors shrugged off the threat of a shutdown and focused on upbeat quarterly earnings. Of the 53 S&P 500 companies that reported through Friday, 79.2% have topped earnings estimates, according to Thomson Reuters I/B/E/S. Halliburton Co rose 2.24% on Monday after posting a much bigger-than-expected quarterly profit in the fourth quarter, benefiting from a shale-driven surge in US oil production. Shares of Netflix, a major contributor to the recent stock rally, were up about 1% ahead of its quarterly results after market closes.  The benchmark US 10-year Treasury yield was close to its highest level in more than three years on Monday. “More concern is coming from the bond market where yields are testing a long-term resistance,” said Brown. “If the yields are going up, and if earnings stay the same, share prices would come down.” The week is heavy on data. Investors will get a peek into the economy’s health during the fourth quarter, with GDP growth numbers and the Fed’s favored inflation measure, personal consumption expenditure, due at the end of the week.