While South Africa’s economy appears to be facing another year of slow growth, 2018 could turn out to be a surprisingly good year for the ruling ANC. The party kicked off its political programme of the year with the January 8 statement where, in his maiden speech as the newly-elected party president, Cyril Ramaphosa invoked “Mandela’s vision of a non-racial society in which the social and economic barriers that have separated black from white are torn down”. Read: Ramaphosa calls for unity as rift over Zuma widens It is an axiom beyond dispute, that the ANC has been wrapped in so much cloud during the past decade and right into the present. The party is ailing with self-inflicted wounds through factions and squabbles for power, unhappy alliance partners plus the persistent corruption of individual leaders. Despite these uncomfortable and real risks at the party’s survival, there is a sense of renewed optimism from its members including a few friends who went to East London to listen to their leader’s address. Unlike the Polokwane conference, the crevice between the winners and losers at Nasrec is but a tiny eye of a needle. Or at least it’s being presented as such publicly, perhaps the David Mabuza “unity” theme is preventing this crevice from widening. While it is tempting, and very common when there’s a leadership vacuum and economic crises, to proclaim that any new leader is a breath of fresh air, I, however, caution that we must not be so excitable that we forget the new ANC president has been part of the current administration for the past ten years. Do not be deceived, the new broom is not so new, it is the same old one, only it has been given a new broomstick – only time will tell how effective it will be in sweeping clean. I did say at the beginning of this column that Ramaphosa’s delivery of his party’s January 8 speech contained within it a glimmer of hope for his party and possibly South Africa. Against the run of ongoing trends within the ANC of the winner takes it all, the new leadership and more so, its supporters are yet to publicly speak of purging those who lost out. In an almost new language to the victor, there was a rather modest return to civility and a conciliation. With emphasis being put on “reflect, draw lessons and inspiration from Mandela” and “to unite, rebuild and renew the movement”. Are we about to see an ANC that charts 2018 in a improved state than it ended 2017? For now, it seems the new leaders of the ruling party understand the interplay between politics and economy. Last week, the World Bank cut its outlook for  South Africa’s economic growth from 1.1% to 0.6%, which is tiny when compared to the growth of some African countries. Has the pin finally dropped for the ruling party? Is it now privy to how political risk and policy ubiquities weigh heavy on South Africa’s economic outlook? It is possible, why else would it want to “restore our focus on building the economy”? The call to return to Mandela’s non-racial society that has no economic barriers for blacks and whites is a clear departure from the rhetoric of the outgoing leadership’s intentional focus on race. It may never happen, but within the party itself there seems to be those who see the potential for its revival and a return to a South Africa bound by a common vision for her people. This, however, is politics. It does not matter how well intentioned or greatly-delivered the perfectly-crafted speech was, it remains empty until those words are put into policies. For fellow realists, statements such as wanting “an economy that encourages and welcomes investment, offers policy certainty and addresses barriers that inhibit growth” and an economy that is built on “efficient and accountable government, responsible businesses and effective trade unions” raises flags. As the ruling party, the ANC has a terrible track record when it comes to offering  policy certainty – the Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development Act (MPRDA) and its Mining Charter bears evidence to this. The Labour Relations Act (LRA) is policy and (although debatable) is perceived as a deterrent to investment. I don’t see how this new leadership will change a policy that already is so deeply entrenched. This is one that will require support from alliance partners to be overhauled. Weakened as it is, Cosatu will not be loosening their grip on this hard-won law. The fact remains; South Africa faces an economy that’s stuck at the bottom of the well while its children are crying for water. It is also a fact that as a power struggle heightens between Ramaphosa and Zuma and their supporters, key political posts will be affected, as outgoing leaders seem unwilling to relinquish power. The incoming leaders will have to boldly claim it. Or their speeches will just remain dreams. Whether Cyril Ramaphosa is ready to accept these complicated realities and lobby his deputy in order to have total control is anybody’s guess. The January 8 statement was a positive spark. Will the world buy it? Are the ratings agencies going to be appeased? Is this enough to jumpstart the economy? I think the ANC, just like the rest of South Africa, is hoping against the odds. * Quotes are from the 2018 January 8 statement of the ANC.