The South African Reserve Bank (Sarb) kept its benchmark repo rate unchanged at 6.75% on Thursday, saying that risks to the inflation forecast were still assessed to be on the upside. The majority of analysts polled by Reuters last week had predicted the repo rate would stay on hold. Sarb governor Lesetja Kganyago told a news conference that five members of the monetary policy committee had voted to hold rates and one member had voted for a 25 basis point cut. Growth “While there have been moderate upward revisions to the growth forecast, the outlook remains challenging.”  Inflation “In recent weeks, some of the risks to the inflation outlook have dissipated somewhat.” “The main drivers of the more favourable forecast were the stronger than expected exchange rate and lower electricity price assumption.” “Near-term inflation is expected to remain close to the midpoint of the target range.” “Inflation is expected to reach a low point below the midpoint of the target range, but then is expected to resume an upward trajectory and measure 5.5 % in the final quarter of next year,” he said.  Rand “In the near term the rand is expected to remain sensitive to sentiment generated by political developments.” “The favourable outlook for capital flows to emerging markets as well as the positive trade account are expected to be supportive of the rand.”  Downgrades “A further downgrade remains a risk, and will depend on government’s response to the deteriorating fiscal position and commitment to credible growth-enhancing policies.” “The lingering prospect of a credit downgrade to sub-investment by Moody’s continues to weigh on the longer term outlook of the rand.” The rand strengthened against the dollar on Thursday’s decision, as some investors had bet that the central bank would cut rates. In November, when the bank last met on rates, it also kept them on hold. But since then inflation slowed to close to the mid-point of the bank’s target range of 3% to 6% and South Africa avoided a potentially damaging double ratings downgrade. The rand has gained more than 13% against the dollar since the November 23 rates meeting, lifted largely by Cyril Ramaphosa’s election as leader of the ruling African National Congress (ANC) in December.