METTA Capital aims to raise R200 million for its first-of-a-kind, Section 12J portfolio of funds over the next month. There has been growing interest in Section 12J companies, particularly over the course of the past year as high-income earners have tried to reduce their tax burden and various new funds have come to market. The tax incentive allows taxpayers to deduct the full amount invested in a qualifying Section 12J Venture Capital Company from their taxable income. The tax deduction is only recouped if they don’t remain invested for five years. It is estimated that the number of 12J funds will have grown to over 100 by the end of February 2018. According to the South African Revenue Service (Sars), there were roughly 70 registered companies by the end of September 2017. The first iteration of the incentive was introduced in 2009 in an effort to stimulate the growth of small- to medium-sized businesses through venture capital investment. “We estimate there will be over R3 billion worth of capital invested in 12Js by the end of February of which we believe approximately R1 billion will be in this current tax window,” Grovest’s Malcolm Segal, who is part of METTA Capital’s management team, said at the launch of the portfolio. According to Sars figures, 724 taxpayers invested in these structures in the 2016/17 tax year, compared to 272 a year earlier. Grovest’s Jeff Miller initially came up with the idea to compile one diversified portfolio of 12J funds that it could bring to market. Segal said the portfolio was not intended to be another channel to bring money into the Grovest stable. It was compiled by a new management team with independent expertise. An investment committee lead by Professor Adrian Saville, chief executive of Cannon Asset Managers, conducted the due diligence on the 12J universe, and narrowed down the options to around 18 funds. The portfolio will invest in eight of these. The funds are diversified across the logistics, mining, hospitality, retail, energy and telecommunications sectors. Source: METTA Capital “I think there is a perception that 12J is venture capital. My experience in reviewing these companies… is that they are not. This is – for the sake of a term – private equity,” Saville said. As with any investment, 12J investors need to do their homework and ensure that they understand the liquidity implications (you lose the tax break if you cash out before five years), tax implications and underlying fee structures. This is of particular importance when comparing the potential return to other investments outside the alternative space, in order to ensure an apples-with-apples comparison. Investors run the risk of assigning too much value to the tax break, and too little to the actual businesses in which funds will invest. Tax considerations should not be the sole reason for investing in a fund. “We regard ourselves as ethical and responsible fund managers and we do not want people to put unrealistic amounts of capital into our funds because it places too much responsibility on us as the fund managers. So we implore you not to put more than a reasonable amount of capital into the fund, that you can afford to have it illiquid for five years,” Segal said. The portfolio targets a blended internal rate of return of 16% and a dividend yield of 5% to 8% per annum. The minimum investment is R500 000. The offer closes on February 23. Weighted average fees include a once-off 1.6% capital raising fee, a 1.86% annual management fee and various performance fees (20% on average). The platform fee is 0.5% per annum. Source: METTA Capital