 WARREN THOMPSON:  A little earlier I spoke to Business Leadership South Africa chief executive Bonang Mohale, who’s preparing to go across to Davos for the World Economic Forum. We had a discussion about the importance of reinforcing South Africa’s positive attributes as an investment destination. I had a few questions to put to him about where our credibility stacks up in terms of going to these international investors and telling them about the positives, given some of the urgent and pressing challenges we have. This is what he told me a little earlier. Bonang, I understand the need to sell the positive, but we’ve also got to be able to deal with the very negative and serious things affecting the economy at the moment. What are you going to tell the people at Davos about that? BONANG MOHALE:  Warren, you are absolutely spot on. As business we are not in the business of lying. When asked, of course we will balance it with absolute pragmatism and realism and we’ll tell the dispassionate facts. But it is how we tell them the facts. So we will say the biggest risk we are facing this week, this year, this month, is one of our State-owned enterprises, Eskom, because today as we speak Eskom’s total debt, both local and foreign, is now R471 billion. This creates almost a R350 billion overhang. Within a matter of days Eskom needs to come up with US$1 billion. So we are talking of R20 to R23 billion to meet their covenant. If they default on that, this does not only pose a total systemic risk that we get another rating agency downgrade, which puts us on a self-perpetuating, vicious cycle of abject poverty. We talk about the need for good governance and management of State-owned enterprises in general, that we as business are always looking at the executive with a lens of integrity, impartiality and objectivity. But we also say, look at the strength of the South African institutions as entrenched in the best Constitution in world. That, even though we have a president that is technically under prosecution, facing 783 charges, our judiciary is totally and absolutely independent because it dared go after a sitting president that is in control of the army and the intelligence and said, ‘No, you ought to face the music. You must have your day in court.’ The judgment that Mogoeng Mogoeng as our chief justice delivered – which announced that the president had failed his oath of office by failing to uphold respect, protect and defend the only contract he had with South Africans, which is our Constitution – is one of the top best 50 speeches in the world. And when a judge by the name of Dunstan Mlambo says, you know as the president you have abused your office, you’ve been reckless and therefore you should pay out of your own pocket these…frequent appeals, abusing the taxpayers’ money, I see that as a threat. And that’s what business will be saying in selling that and moving forward. WARREN THOMPSON:  Bonang, I take that point. One last question I wanted to ask you, and I certainly would ask, if I was an international investor considering an investment in South Africa, and that is: has business done enough to enough to clean its own house, given the scandal surrounding Steinhoff, as well as the many other private companies linked to State capture? Are there other ways that organised business can impose discipline and assist law-enforcement agencies, regulators and investigative authorities in making sure that you have the ability to investigate, as they call it, white-collar crime? BONANG MOHALE:  In fact our answer will be a categorical no. We have not done enough yet to clean up our own house, as evidenced by Steinhoff, by KPMG, by Eskom, by MultiChoice, among others. And our response will be ‘But we have started’. We cannot use as a yardstick that I’ve not be found guilty by any court of law. Leadership is about ethical leadership, principles, about morality, it’s about being legally right but [perhaps] morally wrong and accepting it. It’s about the integrity pledge, which is our anti-corruption oath that we took, that 80 of our countrymen thus have now signed as their own personal pledges, but also pledges for their own entities and for their exports. We say we are on the journey because we went to Alexandra to relaunch this 60-year-old organisation called Business Leadership South Africa. The [significance] of Alexandra is that we moved from the most prime real-estate section. We went across the bridge to the poorest of the poor in Alexandra, so that these CEOs can see how their compatriots lead, because business not only concerns the economic sense of investment and return on average capital employed, but also it’s about social economic development. We are on the journey because our agenda for 2018, and for the next ten years, is transformation, number one, so that South Africa is broadly reflective of our demographics…. Number two it’s about jobs, because we have 27% official unemployment…it’s a national crisis, and business creates jobs. Government doesn’t create jobs. Lastly, it’s about ensuring economic growth, because the economy is growing. We believe in it, we are invested in it, we have taken a chance. We are not retrenching our people when we can show 15% return on investment, because we are conscientious to the oath and therefore we demand conscientious employers. Then we are on the road to prosperity for all. That’s what we talk about – inclusive economic growth. If they tell me there’s no growth, very soon we are talking about the redistribution of poverty, not the redistribution of wealth. Lastly, we are saying we are on the road there, because we are deepening and widening our [engagement] with all social partners especially government. We are moving [to be] heavily engaged, because it is our country too – not just the ANC’s [capture].