WARREN THOMPSON:  For our last segment this evening on the SAfm Market Update, today FNB released its latest property barometer report regarding the FNB provincial and major metro house-price indices. Joining me now on the line is the author of that report, John Loos. Good to have you with us, John. JOHN LOOS:  Good evening, pleasure to be here. WARREN THOMPSON:  Great news for people in some metros and some provincial areas. We are starting to catch up to the Western Cape. Is that what is happening? JOHN LOOS:  Well, you must always be careful what you wish for. The Western Cape has had a very strong price-growth performance in recent years, totally out of sync with the rest of the country. And the result of that is that first-time entrants to the market in that province are really struggling to get in there now. So what’s good for one is not necessarily good for the other. So yes, I think the Western Cape region’s affordability challenges from that strong price growth are catching up with it. It has slowed to 4.4% year-on-year growth. Two years ago it was about 11%. Then we’ve seen the other three major provinces all seeing price growth accelerating off lower bases. They’ve been in the doldrums for quite some time. So we see KZN at 7.9%, Gauteng 2.4%, Eastern Cape still 1.5%. So slow. But all three of them are on an upward trend, more in line with what we’ve seen in the economy – in other words, early signs of possibly better economic growth emerging as we head into 2018. WARREN THOMPSON:  Just to get that right, John, these figures that you are discussing are the quarter’s growth in these different regions? So it’s not the annualised figure, is it? JOHN LOOS:  Well, it’s year on year. So it’s the fourth quarter of last year compared with the fourth quarter of a year before. So it’s over four quarters. WARREN THOMPSON:  Okay. Now the big surprise there is KZN. That grew at 7.9% and I’m perplexed. That’s far in excess of Gauteng, certainly the Eastern Cape and almost double that of the Western Cape. What are the dynamics in that market? JOHN LOOS:  It’s an interesting one, and it’s possibly just that the KZN market might be a little more cyclical. Manufacturing, for one, is more cyclical than the rest of the economy, so a slight economic pickup may be a little bit earlier there. But I wouldn’t read too much into it. If we look at others, it is a little confusing because, if we look at things like average time on the market from our estate agent surveys in the fourth quarter, KZN still has a longer average time of homes on the market prior to sale than Gauteng. Gauteng seems more balanced. So it is difficult to explain at the moment and I’d rather wait for a quarter or two and see, well, is it a sustainable trend or is just a once-off. WARREN THOMPSON:  Outside of the big four, though, it’s been quite a tough time. The five smaller provinces, as you cluster them, experienced negative growth. JOHN LOOS:  Yes, their combined price index is ‑0.9. I’m not overly surprised by that. There are two things that have hampered the smaller provinces in recent years. The one is the end of that mining boom in about 2011 – although mining has come back a little through last year. But I think mining towns have had it quite tough. They are in the smaller provinces. Urbanisation is ongoing. More and more economic activity over the long term focuses around the big metros. And of course there’s been the drought. I know in certain parts of the country the drought is over, but in many it isn’t. So your smaller regions I think still battle from drought conditions in many parts. Supply and demand in Gauteng WARREN THOMPSON:  Just briefly, in terms of the general inventory coming onto the market, despite the tough economic conditions we still have a growing population. Our employment levels have not grown that fast. But also on the supply side my perception is certainly in the kind of middle-income bracket there hasn’t been a lot of new inventory coming on. There has been some, but it doesn’t appear a lot to me, certainly in the Johannesburg area. What are your general views on the type of supply and demand? Is there a mismatch at the moment? JOHN LOOS:  In Gauteng it’s reasonably well balanced, and that’s why as time goes by in this year I would expect Gauteng to see a significant increase in price growth. Gauteng has stayed not too far from an average time of 12 weeks on the market. But the coastal regions have had longer average times on the market, and they have been less balanced or there has been good supply there. But, other than that, if you look at the national average yes, average times on the market are up on average to about 17 weeks from two years ago, where it was down at 11 weeks. That suggests more supply relative to demand than a few years ago. But that was more because of the weakish demand in recent years. Building activity still remains sluggish. So there isn’t masses of new stock coming onto the market or new buildings coming onto the market. Certainly not, no. WARREN THOMPSON:  John, thank you very much for your insights and we look forward to chatting to you again.