In a meeting with European creditors on Friday, Steinhoff’s interim management team was at pains to stress that the company is moving onto a more secure financial footing. Breaking the group into its key constituent parts, Heather Sonn, acting chair of the Supervisory Board noted that immediate liquidity requirements had been largely addressed and operational stability achieved. This enabled the board to shift its focus to broader lender engagement and developing strategic options for the group. Conforama, the pan-European furniture business, has secured an asset-based loan facility of €115 million. The loan became available today (Monday) and drawdowns will begin immediately. In addition, Conforama will sell its 17% stake in Showroomprive.com, the French e-commerce company that offers daily exclusive sales of famous brands, to Carrefour for €79 million. The transaction will be concluded early in February. Together these proceeds will resolve potential funding requirements at Conforama. Read: Steinhoff’s early redemption signals start of divorce The century old kika-Leiner furniture business, headquartered in Austria, faced its own liquidity challenges and a restructuring plan was agreed to last week. However Poco, the European discount furniture business that has expanded to South Africa, is self sufficient. In the UK, Steinhoff has secured short term funding and raised financing of £260 million to date. In the US, funding for Mattress Firm is still being resolved. In December, the company faced a liquidity crunch and immediately set up a senior secured asset-based revolving credit facility to address working capital needs. The $75 million facility is fully drawn. In the Asia Pacific region the liquidity issue is not as severe, but the businesses there are in discussions with their banks to secure additional funding by mid February. What seems clear is that the South African business is carrying the can. The group has agreed with South African lenders that the African subsidiaries (notably Steinhoff Retail Africa, which includes Pep Stores among others) will repay €200 million of intercompany loans due to non-South African entities. This will be funded from PSG share sale proceeds. In addition the group is working to repay the debt of the SA holding companies and redeem the R8 billion worth of bonds that were issued through the domestic medium term note programme. A date for the release of the 2017 accounts (due January 31) and prior year restatements is still to be confirmed and will be determined by the progress of the PwC investigation.