Here’s what caught our attention on Wednesday Steinhoff has reported its former chief executive Markus Jooste to South Africa’s elite ‘Hawks’ police unit, the company’s acting chairwoman told a parliamentary committee hearing on Wednesday. Jooste, who oversaw the company’s rapid expansion over almost two decades, resigned on December 5 as the accounting scandal broke. On Tuesday, research group, Viceroy, implicated Capitec Bank in an investigation on the bank’s financials and loan books. Viceroy described Capitec’s loan book as “overstated”. The research group said Capitec is making up new loans and collections or re-financing R2.5 – 3 billion a year in new loans to default clients. Capitec released a statement late on Tuesday, dismissing the claims and said it was flawed and lacked material information. The South African Reserve Bank said that “Capitec is solvent, well capitalised and has adequate liquidity.” MultiChoice has admitted that it “made mistakes” on its relationship with former Gupta-owned television news channel ANN7 but an internal probe has found that the firm did not engage in corrupt practices. The company has also decided to sever ties with ANN7 when its broadcasting contract with DStv ends on August 20 this year. The newly-appointed Eskom board chairman Jabu Mabuza and interim CEO Phakamani Hadebe were full of confidence on Tuesday that the utility will find the R10 billion Eskom needs to pay its creditors by February 1. It needs another R10 billion by February 26. Hadebe admitted that the money is “not in the bank”, but said the utility has reached an agreement in principle with funders that the funds will be available. Eskom suspended its chief information officer on Wednesday over a letter he wrote to consultancy firm McKinsey, a firm at the centre of allegations of wrongdoing in winning a contract from the utility. While acting as CEO of Eskom Sean Maritz wrote a letter in January to McKinsey telling them a contract, which the utility deemed unlawful, was in fact lawful, said Eskom spokesman Khulu Phasiwe.