When the Tigon criminal trial resumes in the South Gauteng High court on February 12 this year, the spotlight will fall on state key witness Jack Milne’s earlier plea and sentence agreement. Tigon kingpins Gary Porritt and Sue Bennett are standing trial on more than 2 000 charges, racketeering and contraventions of the Companies Act, Income Tax Act and the Stock Exchanges Control Act. The charges relate to the collapse of JSE-listed financial services company Tigon around 2002. Porritt was the group’s CEO and Bennett a director. Milne, who was the CEO of Progressive Systems College Guaranteed Growth (PSCGG) at the time, was arrested with them. PSCGG was an investment fund guaranteed by Tigon. Milne earlier testified about a conspiracy to defraud investors that started with the drafting of the prospectus and included the fabrication of the Net Asset Value. He alleged that he, Porritt and Bennett were central to this. He pleaded guilty, entered into a plea and sentence agreement with the state and served his sentence years ago. Porritt and Bennett’s trial only started late in 2016 as a result of numerous applications and appeals brought by the accused. They are unrepresented in the trial, stating that they don’t have money to pay for lawyers. The state in earlier court papers however alleged that Porritt has direct or indirect control over assets of more than R100 million and that the pair follow a strategy of employing legal representation only when it suits them. Milne is the state’s first witness and has almost finished his evidence in chief. Porritt and Bennett indicated in court on Monday that they want to challenge the plea and sentence agreement the state submitted as the one Milne signed. The original could not be found in court archives and the state submitted the best copy it could find, supported by affidavits to its authenticity. The accused question this and allege that the state is misleading the court as part of an ongoing conspiracy against them. Judge Brian Spilg will hear arguments about the matter on February 12, before Porritt and Bennett will commence to cross-examine Milne. In the meantime, no date has yet been set for the ruling in Porritt’s fresh bail application that was heard late last year. He simultaneously petitioned the Supreme Court of Appeal (SCA) for leave to appeal a finding that he earlier intended not to attend court and which led to his incarceration. The SCA has not yet made a ruling in this regard. Porritt and Bennett earlier indicated that they plan to bring an application for Spilg to recuse himself on the basis that he is biased against them. On Monday Porritt said the application has not yet been prepared due to his incarceration. Spilg said the trial will continue in the absence of such an application.