South Africans are nothing, if not resilient. Following the recent confirmation that Cyril Ramaphosa has been appointed in the top leadership spot during last year’s widely anticipated 54th ANC elective conference, many citizens appear to have welcomed the news that the most controversial and economically destructive leadership in our country’s democratic history is officially coming to an end.  This long-overdue leadership transition has been met by not only public relief, but similarly by investor euphoria. Evidence of how quickly sentiment has changed can be sighted in the South African rand’s impressive gain of 9.5% from R13.59 to R12.30 versus the US dollar since the December 2017 announcement. ZAR/USD experiences volatile 2017  Source: Bloomberg With the initial euphoria having begun to fade, many investors will now undoubtedly be asking themselves whether this over-night shift in market sentiment is indeed warranted, or whether market participants could perhaps be getting ahead of themselves. While it’s certainly true that South Africa’s dismal growth rate will take years to rebound, investor and business confidence, both of which have been all but decimated over the past few years due to business-government infighting and perpetual political scandals, is capable of rebounding almost instantaneously.  As illustrated below, South Africa has been forced to endure a self-inflicted economic drought since as far back as 2011. According to the International Momentary Fund (IMF), South Africa is expected to grow a dismal 0.7% in 2017, well below that of our emerging market peer group’s 4.6% growth forecast. With an average growth disparity of 3.5% per year, the disheartening dislocation between South Africa and our emerging market peers has proven most pronounced under the leadership of president Jacob Zuma. SA GDP growth significantly weaker than EM peers Source: Momentum, IMF, October 2017 database While it has proven all to tempting for our most recent, statistically-challenged leadership to formulate a myriad of excuses to justify South Africa’s comparably lackluster growth, the reality as highlighted by international ratings agencies is that self-inflicted political missteps, the fostering of distrust among the private sector and the widespread perception of corruption has significantly eroded investor confidence. This has resulted in a growth rate well below that which is required to absorb the overwhelming 27.7% of citizens that are currently unsuccessful in their on-going search for employment. Suppressed economic growth, rising levels of unemployment, an unsustainable tax revenue shortfall and an on-going fixed investment recession by the domestic private sector has proven painfully effective at deterring foreign investment and undermining the recommendations of global ratings agencies. Let’s hope that this particular leadership legacy is quickly forgotten. Global equity flows – brace for a change in tide Source: IIF, SBF Securities. Note IIF estimates used for August and September 2017 In light of market commentator’s uniformly positive responses towards Ramaphosa’s recent victory, it is tempting to conclude that this development reflects much needed progress for citizens and investors alike. At face value the economic consequences are simple, improved investor sentiment, favorable price adjustments for SA Inc. listed equities, a stronger South African rand, weaker inflation and perhaps even scope for the South African Reserve Bank (Sarb) to reduce interest rates further in the coming months. The implications for South African investors however may not be as intuitive. The reality is that the vast majority of fund managers (and thus by extension investors) have intentionally maximised their offshore exposures; a profitable strategy when the South African rand’s decline appeared to be a seemingly one-sided bet. These investors will unlikely be celebrating the recent revival of our depressed domestic currency. The only group less enthusiastic would perhaps be retired savers who are reliant on inflation-inspired interest rate increases. Investing for an income will surely prove challenging in the months ahead. Despite the JSE recording all-time highs in 2017, the reality is that a merely 56% of JSE listed shares were positive for the year prior to this week’s ANC elective conference. Much like unit trusts that have benefitted over the past few years from their international exposures, dual-listed multi-national companies such as Naspers, British American Tobacco, Richmond, AB InBev and several international mining companies have proven extremely effective at outperforming their uninspired SA Inc. peers.   Following years of domestic counters being out of favour with investors, approximately 55% of these domestically focused companies boast a P/E (price-to-earnings ratio) of 15 and below, which means in the event of political resolution that ushers in a period of economic stability and renewed confidence, these counters stand to substantially benefit. Little wonder then that South African retailers, banks, insurers, gaming and leisure companies have all experienced double digit gains in the final days of 2017. While the prospect of investment returns based solely on political probabilities have often proved elusive, the reality is surprisingly simple; the catalyst to galvanise a positive shift in sentiment can materialise instantaneously and in fact may have already begun. With luck we may even be able to avoid an immediate downgrade of our sovereign debt to junk by Moody’s in the first quarter of the new year, should they be willing to temporarily overlook our projected R50.8 billion tax revenue shortfall.  Steven Schultz is head of Investment Marketing at Momentum Investments.