Amendments to the insurance regulations are expected to increase policyholder protection and lessen the risk of biased advice being given to policy holders. The amendments to both the long-term and short-term insurance regulations, which were gazetted on December 15 2017 and came into effect on January 1 2018, effectively introduce a remuneration cap of 9% of premium income for binder holders. Binder holders are third parties, who act as “front faces” for insurers and perform specific functions related to any type of policy. Per the respective Long-term and Short-term Insurance Acts, binder holders may perform the following functions on behalf of insurers: (a) Enter into, vary or renew a long/short-term policy (excluding a long/short-term reinsurance policy) (b) Determine the wording of a long/short-term policy (c) Determine premiums under a long/short-term policy (d) Determine the value of policy benefits under a long/short-term policy (e) Settle claims under a long/short-term policy The amended regulations mean binder holders, authorised to give advice under the Financial Advisory and Intermediary Services (Fais) Act, may receive a maximum of 9% in remuneration. The fee comprises 3.5% for entering into, varying or renewing policies, which may be increased to 5% should the aforementioned functions include determining policy wordings, premiums or benefits. A provision of 4% is made for settling claims, while binder holders who simply determine wordings, premiums or benefits are not entitled to a fee. Previously, binder holder fees varied from well below 9% to as much as 20%, industry insiders said. The maximum remuneration cap is expected to bring consistency in the interpretation and application of fees such that they are reasonable and commensurate to functions performed. Jo-Ann Ferreira, head of the Financial Services Board’s (FSB) Insurance Regulatory Framework Department, said the FSB determined the 9% cap in conjunction with National Treasury and the industry following a 2016 request for information from insurers regarding binder functions and fees paid. The Association for Savings and Investment South Africa (Asisa) told Moneyweb that its members think that the fee is “pitched at the right level”, while adding that the regulations allow for exemptions to be applied for in appropriate circumstances. Patrick Bracher, a director at Norton Rose Fulbright, says the amendments would allow insurers to apply known-amounts to risk benefits for insured clients as they now know exactly how much to pay for binder services, thereby benefitting the insured. “[Risk benefits] are unlikely to be decreased by excessive binder fees. There should be a reasonable amount available for paying for your risk benefits and not for binder fees,” he said in response to a question about whether risk benefits are now likely to increase. He added that it would address conflicts of interest within the industry, whereby binder holders may have been tempted to sell certain products over others based on fees they would likely receive.