Wall Street was set to open sharply lower on Wednesday as investors were spooked by a report that China is considering slowing or halting purchases of US government debt. The dollar dropped more than half a percent against a basket of currencies, while long-dated Treasury yields hit fresh 10-month highs after the Bloomberg report said the US bond market was becoming less attractive for Beijing. “The futures are indicating a nasty opening as climbing yields awaken investors to a possible meltdown in the government bond market,” Peter Cardillo, chief market economist at First Standard Financial in New York, wrote in a client note. If losses hold until markets open, the Dow would open in the red for the first time in 2018. “For a market that was probably looking for reason to take a pause, it’s not unreasonable to use today’s rise in yield as a catalyst,” said Art Hogan, chief market strategist at B. Riley FBR in Boston. The CBOE Volatility index, a widely followed measure of market anxiety, jumped 2 points from its life low of 8.56. At 8:13 a.m. ET (1313 GMT), Dow e-minis were down 107 points, or 0.42%, with 32,766 contracts changing hands. S&P 500 e-minis were down 10.75 points, or 0.39%, with 223,418 contracts traded. Nasdaq 100 e-minis were down 38 points, or 0.57%, on volume of 42,431 contracts. The S&P and the Nasdaq closed at a record high for sixth day in a row on Tuesday on optimism ahead of quarterly earnings reports. Big banks JPMorgan and Wells Fargo will kick off the earnings season on Friday. Fourth-quarter earnings for S&P 500 companies are expected to increase by 11.8%, with biggest contribution from the energy sector, according to Thomson Reuters I/B/E/S. “It will be the first time that Corporate America has the ability to talk about guidance that incorporates lower tax rates. It’s going to confusing and noisy but will be fascinating, ” Hogan said. Among stocks, shares of No.2 US homebuilder Lennar Corp fell 1.66% after its profit missed estimates due to a delay in the booking of a single large transaction. Nordstrom shares were down about 5% after reporting its holiday period same-store sales. Nvidia slipped 1.45% after the chipmaker said some of its chipsets have been affected by a memory corruption flaw.