Economists widely expect the South African Reserve Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) to keep interest rates on hold on Thursday, despite an improved inflation outlook. The local currency has strengthened significantly since the MPC’s last meeting in November after Cyril Ramaphosa was elected ANC president. A Nersa decision to grant Eskom a 5.2% tariff increase as opposed to the 19.9% it asked for, should also keep the CPI trajectory in check. But economists warn that uncertainty regarding South Africa’s fiscal numbers and the risk that Moody’s may downgrade the country’s local currency rating to junk, will likely move the MPC to adopt a cautious stance. PwC economist Christie Viljoen says the MPC cannot afford to cut rates at present due to the risks associated with the 2018/19 fiscal budget. “If the budget presentation [in February] shows a weakening in fiscal discipline, South Africa could see its local bond rating being downgraded by Moody’s Investors Service during March. This, in turn, could result in a substantial outflow of money from the local bond market. “An accompanied weakening in the rand would pressure inflation closer towards the upper end of the target band.” STANLIB chief economist Kevin Lings expects the Sarb to keep rates on hold, but to highlight the improvement in the currency as well as the lower than expected electricity price increase awarded. Lings says most people are lowering their inflation forecasts for 2018 and the market is pricing in some reduction in interest rates during the coming months. He expects two cuts of 25 basis points each after the budget and for rates to be kept on hold thereafter. Apart from the uncertainty regarding possible credit rating action, the impact of further hikes in US interest rates on capital flows to emerging markets also argues against the Sarb cutting rates aggressively. Citi economist Gina Schoeman also expects rates to be kept on hold, but says it will likely be a close call accompanied by a dovish statement compared to that of November. Two major inflation risks – the ANC election and electricity tariffs – are out of the way and the outcome has been favourable to the inflation outlook. “However, inflation risks in the form of the February Budget, Moody’s decision and debate on Zuma remain. What’s more, the oil price has risen which will offset some of the benefit to the inflation outlook from a stronger currency. If all ends up favourable by March then the Sarb can certainly deliver a rate cut then, and perhaps even in May.” The Ramaphosa factor Towards the end of 2017, commentators were largely on the fence about South Africa’s economic prospects and were waiting for more certainty about political developments. While Ramaphosa’s election was widely perceived as positive for markets and the economy, Viljoen says his election has “not really” changed the outlook for interest rates in the short term. It will only boost consumer and business confidence once he takes over as national president. Schoeman says the rand’s response to Ramaphosa’s election certainly opens the door for another cut in the short term. This explains why forward-rate agreements are currently pricing in a 30% probability of a cut, which is fair in her opinion. “We do however think Ramaphosa needs to start delivering something for this to sustain.” Lings says Ramaphosa’s election has had a positive impact on markets – especially the domestic bond market and the currency. This is partly because Ramaphosa has highlighted the need for policy clarity and the importance of lifting business and consumer confidence. The improvement in the currency has led to a more positive inflation outlook and the possibility of rate cuts to support growth. “In general, the last MPC statement was seen as hawkish, so a rate cut is not certain, but there is a window of opportunity to cut rates within the next six months assuming the political environment continues to improve.” There are also indications that the economic outlook has improved since 2017. Schoeman says GDP growth looks to have bottomed and somewhat stronger economic growth is likely. Business and consumer confidence are likely to rise in response to Ramaphosa’s election, but she is not convinced that this will translate into a lot more immediate spending or investment given the political cycle. “That said, the economy is capable of returning to its trend growth rate. Achieving above-trend growth however would require significant policy reform response which we have not yet seen. What’s more, global conditions are conducive to GDP growth doing better. The question is whether internal politics and policies will allow the economy to benefit fully from the global backdrop,” she says.