South African start-ups encounter a lot of challenges and friction given the economics of today. Finding the right opportunities and skillset to develop their business will help entrepreneurs grow their businesses. Networking and adopting a collaborative approach with those already in the industry are great starting points. Keri-Leigh Paschal, the executive director of Nation Builder says a lot of small businesses lack the understanding of social development and don’t know how to engage with it. However, getting corporates to invest in social development plays a vital role in increasing opportunities and ensuring sustainability for all South Africans. Nation Builder, which was officially launched in 2013, has the main objective of equipping, enabling and mobilising businesses in order to leverage what their business has at its disposal towards social good and nation building. “Nation Builder was established so that we could help businesses leverage what they have. Sometimes businesses don’t have money that they can invest, but can leverage products or staff or skillsets, or whatever they have at their disposal to use it for social good, and nation building,” she said Paschal offers seven tips on how corporates can invest towards long-lasting social development: When all of this is said and done, however, the key is to remember that social investment is fundamentally about people. It is so important for funders to realise the great impact of deep relationships in the success of a project. If you only do one thing to invest in long-lasting social development outcomes, invest in relationships. It is even worth allocating time and funds for building relationships with your partners (implementers, co-investors and beneficiaries) as part of your CSI spend. By investing in these relationships, the initial phase of a project may take a little longer, but the results will be exponential and sustainable. Nation Builder has an online self-assessment to help businesses establish how well they are already doing in its social investment. The assessment helps identify where there is room for improvement to ensure that every cent invested in social development has the greatest effect possible. 