Earlier this week, Logan Paul’s name was added to a growing list of dethroned YouTube stars after posting a controversial video, which depicted a Japanese suicide victim. Soon after posting the video, YouTube cut ties with the popular vlogger – dropping him from their preferred ad programme and their sponsored video content. With a subscriber base of more than 15 million and estimated earnings of around R161 million for 2017, we’re left wondering – what were you thinking, bro? How does someone earn R161 million from posting videos? How exactly YouTubers earn their income is a closely-guarded secret that is difficult to breakdown without the actual analytics of their accounts. However, contrary to widespread belief, income is not only earned from the number of views a video has or the number of subscribers on the channel. Instead, revenue is earned based on a mix of ad views, ad clicks and length of time viewers spend on the channel. To further complicate the process, the amount of income a vlogger receives depends on the location of their audience members. So, if your fanbase is mostly based in India, you may get paid less than someone with fewer fans who are based in the UK. More cash can come from collaborating with big brands that will pay to be mentioned in vlogs. And closer to home? Vlogging is still in its infancy here on our sunny shores. Two of the most subscribed accounts belong to Casper Lee (born in the UK but schooled in SA) and Die Antwoord – boasting around 9.5 million and 1.5 million subscribers respectively. These two accounts are somewhat outliers as Casper lives in the UK and Die Antwoord has a strong international presence and therefore the two have access to global audiences. The ~150 000 and ~120 000 subscribers of Derick Watts & The Sunday Blues and SuzelleDIY, respectively, are a more reasonable indication of the popularity of SA vloggers. Outside of the super popular channels, the average SA vlogger can earn in the region of R10 000 per brand mention. Not bad for something you can do from the beach. Interested to see what your favourite YouTube star earns? Check out Social Blade to estimate how much your favourite vloggers are earning. Should I quit my day job? Unfortunately, it’s not as simple as you may think. Last year, advertisers raised issues about their ads appearing before videos that their brand didn’t want to associate with. To fix this issue, YouTube has promised to assemble a team of 10 000 individuals who will watch an ad, then watch the YouTube video that follows, and then manually approve the association. Going forward, vloggers will also need at least 1 000 subscribers and more than 4 000 hours of viewed content within the past 12 months to be eligible. Nathan Ramages is a content contributor to Digest and this article first appeared in that publication.