The following stories caught our attention today: After the Presidency announced the new board for Eskom on Saturday, the utility’s executives are hoping to turn on the lending taps again. The state-owned company, which has been in the news for all the wrong reasons lately, has to undertake a significant amount of sweet talking to persuade local banks to lend it R20 billion. National Treasury will support Eskom’s bid. Steinhoff plans to sell about R7.5 billion of shares in investment firm PSG Group as it scrambles to plug a liquidity gap after it disclosed “accounting irregularities”. The JSE added another item to Steinhoff’s list of woes on Monday, saying that it may suspend trade in Steinhoff bonds if the company’s delayed financial results are not published before the end of February. Platinum miner Lonmin reported a 65% drop in 2017 profit on Monday as the company took a $1.1 billion impairment charge after a business review. Bruised by higher costs and subdued commodity prices, the miner, which is being bought by Sibanye-Stillwater, said earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortisation fell to $40 million for the year to September 30 from $115 million a year earlier. Western Cape premier Helen Zille is holding talks today, as “day zero” in the Cape Town water crisis approaches. Zille will be meeting with National Disaster Management, the South African Police Services, the South African Defence Force, the State Security Agency and other key role players. The plan is to resolve issues relating to water accessibility and management. Zille also plans to approach stakeholders in the private sector to assist with the rolling-out of the project. Minister of Social Development Bathabile Dlamini finds herself in the hot seat once again. The Constitutional Court has ordered the inquiry to investigate whether Dlamini should be held personally liable for the grants saga. Sassa recently agreed to take over the payments of social grants, with the help of the SA Post Office.