South Africa’s underprivileged youth are the target of a new application design platform that was launched by South African-based company Neutrinos. Neutrinos was established in 2015 to give South Africa’s underprivileged and under-resourced population the tools to equip and empower themselves through application design and development. Speaking at the official launch of its skills development initiative, Winds of Change, in Johannesburg, CEO and founder of Neutrinos, Samik Ghosh said their aim is to eradicate poverty through education and access to opportunity. “We formed Neutrinos in 2015, but we had the vision of democratising application (app) development, because the power of application development can reach the masses,” he said. An app, by the way, is a software program that performs certain functions or tasks online or on mobile devices. The company was launched in South Africa and then taken to India and Singapore. Ghosh said he saw opportunity for the project in South Africa because the country serves as a catalyst and test-bed for all change that happens in Africa “We are seeing a transformational shift happening in Africa, in the corporate space, where people are going away from proprietary application platform, from large corporations like IBM and Microsoft to more open-source, which gave us the right indication,” he added. The Winds of Change skills development initiative which was launched last Thursday, is a non-profit initiative. Neutrinos plans to train a group of underprivileged candidates in app design and development. Each will be awarded a stipend to further their development. Neutrinos chief technology officer (CTO), Suresh Chandrasekharan said the app enables anyone, from any background to design and develop an app for their own needs. The platform supplies the tools and makes app building simple. “We tried to eliminate the difficulty in building an app, you just need the imagination, and what you do with that is up to you,” said Chandrasekharan. The design of the Neutrinos platform itself has built-in integration tools that allows the user to borrow data from reputable sources. The app, once customised and designed can be placed on either Google Playstore or on iStore for people to download and use. Applications can be designed for both private and public use. Neutrinos has collaborated with enterprises such as Absa, Telesure, MultiChoice, SBV, and TATA in India to gain its funding, and Ghosh said they have reached 95% of its target revenue in the last financial year. He added that revenues are also coming from partners, who are seeing the potential of the platform to build solutions for their customers. The platform is available to anyone from small business incubators, SMMEs, and start-ups to help them optimise their businesses and build more solutions. 