Here are some of the things people in markets are talking about today. Bonds week The 10-year Treasury traded with the highest yields since April 2014 this morning, while the yield on the German five-year bond moved above zero for the first time since December 2015. The selloff comes as the dollar halts its recent slide ahead of a busy week for fixed-income investors. On Wednesday, the Federal Reserve may shift its language to a more hawkish tone in Janet Yellen’s last meeting as chair, according to Goldman Sachs Group. Friday brings payrolls data for January, which should give the first clear view of the US economy after a disappointing end to 2017. Long oil Hedge funds reported record wagers on continued price increases for both US and global benchmark crude prices as the oil market remains a one-way bet for investors. Last week, drillers in the US added the most rigs since March 2017 as oil remained close to the highest level in three years. A barrel of West Texas Intermediate for March delivery was trading at $66.10 by 5:40 am Eastern Time. May day British Prime Minister Theresa May is again under pressure from rebel members of her own party as the UK government seeks to find common ground on a Brexit position ahead of the start of talks on the ‘transition phase’ of the country’s exit from the European Union. She already faces calls to sack Chancellor of the Exchequer Philip Hammond after he suggested a softening of the terms of the divorce after her approach came under criticism. Analysts suggest that politics may start moving the pound lower this week following a gain of more than 4% this month. Markets slip Overnight, the MSCI Asia Pacific Index slipped 0.1%, while Japan’s Topix index closed 0.1% higher as investors waited for data this week. In Europe, the Stoxx 600 Index was 0.2% lower at 5:40, with consumer staples the worst-performing sector. S&P 500 futures slipped 0.3%, the 10-year Treasury note yielded 2.71% and gold was down. Data due While the big economic number this week is the January payrolls data on Friday, there are some important releases today. At 8:30 am, the core PCE deflator, Federal Reserve’s preferred inflation gauge, is published: expectations are for it to remain unchanged at 1.5%. Personal spending is projected to slow to 0.4%, with incomes rising 0.4%. The US is expected to publish a list of Russian oligarchs with connections to Vladimir Putin later today, with the risk of increased sanctions putting pressure on that country’s bonds. © 2018 Bloomberg