During trying economic conditions consumers place a high priority on their health and appearances. Not because they are wasteful when they should be practising austerity but because purchasing beauty items still guarantees the feel-good factor. “Beauty is seen as an affordable luxury. You might not buy the dress but you will buy the lipstick even if it means switching to generic medicine,” said David Kneale, the CEO of health and beauty retailer Clicks. This makes him a firm believer in the lipstick index. The index was made popular by Estée Lauder chairman emeritus Leonard Lauder, who first noticed that beauty product sales tend to rise during hard times, for instance during the Great Depression. This phenomenon continues to support Clicks given its long track record of delivering solid earnings. Thus the flagship Clicks chain increased sales 14.2% while comparable store sales (excluding new stores opened) advanced by 7.5% for the five months to January 14 2018. Even when selling price inflation of 2.7% is included, the Clicks chain showed real volume growth of 4.8%. The health and beauty category is proving more resilient than the apparel category as seen in the recent Woolworths and Truworths trading updates, showing that the retailers are buckling under the weight of SA’s economy that is growing at less than 1% coupled with weak consumer confidence. Read: Mixed fortunes for SA retailers as Mr Price ups sales Clicks pulled out all the stops to benefit from the Christmas season trade. “We have positioned Clicks as a value retailer, we are very price competitive on everyday prices,” said Kneale. At work to achieve this was its buy-two-and-get-one-free promotions on 2 000 product lines – from fine fragrances to chocolates. Drugstore model Since Kneale’s appointment as CEO in 2006, Clicks has rapidly expanded to have the qualities of a drugstore model – much like CVS and Walgreens in the US – in which its stores are supported by in-store pharmacies. The drugstore model has a place in SA, as Kneale puts it: “In healthcare, you are seeing more people choosing to self-medicate over the counter rather than visit a doctor. And this, of course, brings more feet in stores.” Clicks operates over 480 pharmacies in its store network of more than 522 stores. And more pharmacies are imminent given the retailer’s seven-year plan to open 900 stores in SA – at a rate of 30 stores per year. The retailer’s pharmacies are supported by its UPD business, which is a wholesale medicine distributor. UPD increased sales by 11.6% and volumes grew by 5.4% when including selling price inflation of 6.2% during the reporting period. In fact, half of UPD’s business is supplying Clicks pharmacies. Evidence of more Clicks pharmacies buying more pharmaceutical products from UPD and not from other pharmaceutical wholesalers is seen in the Clicks’ intragroup sales, which grew by 20.5%. Jean Pierre Verster, portfolio manager at Fairtree Capital, said SA’s pharmaceutical market remains fragmented, helping Clicks gain market share. “There is still a large number of independent pharmacies out there. This allows Clicks to win market share much easier in its market versus food and apparel players in their markets,” said Verster. Enter Dis-Chem But Clicks faces competition for growth in SA’s pharmaceutical space, mainly from Dis-Chem. The recently JSE-listed Dis-Chem plans to double its store network from 110 in the next five to eight years in SA and Namibia. There are differences between growth strategies of both retailers: Dis-Chem focuses on big-format stores (as large as 1 800 square metres) based in malls while Clicks prefers smaller stores (about 600 square metres) in convenience malls. Whichever strategy investors back, it will nonetheless be an expensive one, as Clicks and Dis-Chem are trading at a dizzying 32 x PE and 42 x PE respectively. “Clicks has done extremely well, specifically after Kneale took over as CEO. As long as they continue to exceed expectations, that will support the valuation of its stock,” said Verster.