South African President Jacob Zuma said he would appoint a commission of inquiry into allegations that the Gupta family was allowed to influence state decisions and that he would abide by a court ruling for the Chief Justice to select its leader. The High Court in December rejected Zuma’s arguments that he alone can set up the commission and ordered him to pay the cost of the case. While the president has appealed the cost order and the judgment regarding the duties of the president to appoint commissions, he said in a statement on Tuesday he is taking further legal advice on this. “I am concerned that this matter has occupied the public mind for some time now and deserves urgent attention,” Zuma said. “The allegations that the state has been wrestled out of the hands of its real owners, the people of South Africa, is of paramount importance and are therefore deserving of finality and certainty.” Zuma’s about-turn comes a day before the new top leadership of the ruling African National Congress meets for the first time on Wednesday. A proposal to order Zuma to step down before his term ends in 2019 will be discussed at the gathering in the city of East London, according to three people who spoke on condition of anonymity. Zuma’s scandal-tainted tenure has eroded support for the ANC and he lost control of the party to his deputy, Cyril Ramaphosa, at an elective conference last month. ‘Political interference’
Public Protector Thuli Madonsela said in November 2016 that Chief Justice Mogoeng Mogoeng should appoint the head of the inquiry because the president had a conflict of interest. Mogoeng has selected Deputy Chief Justice Raymond Zondo, Zuma said on Tuesday. Zuma didn’t say who the commission’s other members will be. Madonsela had ordered the inquiry into allegations that the Guptas may have influenced the appointment of cabinet members in Zuma’s administration and received special treatment for a coal business linked to the family and one of the president’s sons. Zuma and the Guptas have denied wrongdoing. “The commission is a step towards ridding the country of corruption, and must do its work without delay,” Mmusi Maimane, the head of the main opposition Democratic Alliance said in a statement. “It must be properly staffed, fully funded and free from any and all political inference.” The party also tweeted the following: As the initial complainant in the #StateCapture report, we will closely monitor the Commission over the next 180 days. We will not allow this Commission to be another whitewash that absolves all politically connected individuals from accountability. – @MmusiMaimane — Democratic Alliance (@Our_DA) January 10, 2018  Social media was quick to weigh in on the news: Interesting question. Has President Zuma perempted himself when he appointed Commission of Inquiry, making an appeal impossible? See Venmop 275 (Pty) Ltd and Another v Cleverland Projects (Pty) and Another (2014/14286) [2015] ZAGPJHC 176; 2016 (1) SA 78 (GJ) (3 August 2015): pic.twitter.com/DVILURfmFq — Pierre de Vos (@pierredevos) January 10, 2018  I think we have reached the end of the Zuma nightmare! He and many of the cronies in the @MYANC can’t survive the skeletons that will be tumbling out of that closet. He may as well just resign now – it’s game over! Thanks again to those who resisted! #StateCaptureInquiry — Zwelinzima Vavi (@Zwelinzima1) January 9, 2018  We welcome the commission of inquiry into #StateCapture, but urge @CyrilRamaphosa to not wait for the outcome. You have a window of opportunity to get rid of the kingpin of #corruption in our govt within the next few weeks. We politely request you to use it. — OUTA (@OUTASA) January 10, 2018  In any commission of inquiry the terms of reference are key. We need to see those first. #StateCapture — Songezo Zibi (@SongezoZibi) January 9, 2018  As I have done in the past when he was appointed I endorse Deputy Chief Justice #RaymondZondo as an ethical jurist who will do justice to Commission of Inquiry into #StateCapture.The judiciary has upheld the rule of law with distinction in SA thanks to him and others. — KevinSifisoMalunga (@KevinMalunga) January 9, 2018  Well Jacob Zuma has finally instituted the #StateCapture inquiry. Justice Zondo to head it up. 2 options – either he was given the ultimatum in exchange for a stay of execution. Or he did it unilaterally in order to argue there's no basis for removing him from office. #Zuma — Khaya Sithole (@CoruscaKhaya) January 9, 2018   