Here’s what caught our attention on Friday. The Labour Court in Johannesburg issued an interim order on Friday, restraining Eskom from unlawfully terminating Matshela Koko’s contract of employment. This follows after Koko, who is Eskom’s head of Generation, applied for an interdict to prevent Eskom from firing him. An ultimatum was put to him on Thursday to resign before 10:00 on Friday because he is seen as “the face of corruption” at Eskom, or be dismissed. Koko refuses to resign, saying he has done nothing wrong. On Thursday, former Eskom CEO Brian Molefe appeared in the Gauteng High Court where Judge Elias Matojane ruled that the decision made by the Eskom board to accept Molefe’s early retirement in December 2016 was unlawful; that his reinstatement as CEO by the Minister of Public Enterprises was unlawful and his R10.3 million pension payout was also (you guessed it) unlawful. The court ordered that these payments be repaid within ten days of the order.  Friday marks the conclusion of the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, and before departing, Deputy President Cyril Ramaphosa took full advantage of the opportunity to earn brownie points for SA. Ramaphosa said South Africa cannot afford nuclear power, and that the building of nuclear plants will only be considered if it is affordable. The proposal tabled by President Zuma to build eight nuclear reactors from 2023 would cost the country R1 trillion. Alongside this, Ramaphosa said that under his leadership the country is entering ‘a new era’ – a sign that President Zuma’s days are numbered. This is Ramaphosa’s bid to win back investors to South Africa and make our economy great again. Mining company Anglo-American Platinum confirmed that on February 1 it will make a cash payment of R400 million to Siyanda Resources, for the sale of two mining operations: Union Mine and MASA Chrome Company. The sale will help to reduce net debt and strengthen the mining company’s balance sheet. Siyanda will take over ownership, control and management of these operations on the same day. The software services company reported a 46% increase in its turnover for the six months ending December 31. The performance was attributed to a 17% improvement in organic growth and the acquisition of Micros, a hospitality sector software specialist which contributed 24% to Adapt IT’s interim results.