Here’s what caught our attention on Thursday: The R7 billion write-down of Woolworths’ grand dame Australian department chain David Jones has confirmed suspicions long held by market watchers: the retailer overpaid for its massive gamble Down Under. The announcement late on Wednesday by Woolworths that it faces an impairment charge for David Jones of A$712.5 million (R6.9 billion at the time of writing) reflects how its expansion into Australia has not lived up to expectations for a group that was once billed as a retail darling in the investment community. Read: Woolworths faces write-down nightmare in Australia The High Court in Pretoria has ruled on Thursday that Brian Molefe had indeed resigned from Eskom as CEO and therefore is ordered to payback R11 million of the pension payout he received from the power utility. Solidarity says it welcomes ruling and plans to make representations to the NPA on criminal prosecution. On Wednesday, the rand strengthened and dropped below the R12/US$  level for the first time since 2015. It traded at R11.93/$ just before 6pm on Wednesday. Economists are attributing the performance to the ‘Cyril effect’ at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland. Ramaphosa, speaking to Bloomberg TV from WEF, said the “wheels of change are moving”, as he vowed to investors that South Africa’s economy is taking a positive turn. South Africa’s producer price index (PPI) for December 2017 has risen 5.2% year on year from 5.1% in November 2017, data from Statistics South Africa showed on Thursday. In 2017 prices picked up mostly for food, beverages and tobacco products. The PPI change averaged 5.8% from 2013 until 2017. The mining company reported a 4% decrease in platinum group metals (PGM) in its fourth quarter, ended December 2017. The miner said this was due to its decision to close the unprofitable ounces from Bokoni Platinum Mine, which was also placed under care and maintenance. There was also a temporary closure of the Mototolo concentrator. PGM sales increased 19% after the increase in refined PGM production and reduced selling of refined stock to normalised levels.