The R7 billion write-down of Woolworths’ grand dame Australian department chain David Jones has confirmed suspicions long held by market watchers: the retailer overpaid for its massive gamble Down Under. The announcement late on Wednesday by Woolworths that it faces an impairment charge for David Jones of A$712.5 million (R6.9 billion at the time of writing) reflects how its expansion into Australia has not lived up to expectations for a group that was once billed as a retail darling in the investment community. “It’s a reality check for Woolworths as they are recognising that they have made big mistakes in Australia and it overpaid for David Jones,” said Cassie Treurnicht, a portfolio manager at Gryphon Asset Management. Woolworths completed – with fanfare –  its ambitious R22 billion acquisition of David Jones and sister retailer Country Road Group in 2014, telling shareholders that its bold move into Australia would morph it into a substantial retailer in the southern hemisphere. At the time, the acquisition was the biggest made by a South African retailer. Some investors cheered the aggressive move into Australia, arguing that it had limited growth opportunities in sub-Saharan Africa while others were nervous at the sheer scale of the acquisition. Management – led by the straight-talking Scotsman Ian Moir – allayed shareholder jitters saying that the David Jones acquisition was justified as the retailer chased hard-currency earnings given SA’s sluggish economy, hard-pressed consumers, rand volatility and increasing political uncertainty. Read: Woolworths is still facing many battles And to those who still questioned whether the David Jones brand equity would eventually turn into shareholder value? Moir said shareholders should be patient as acquisitions of this nature take time to turn around and extract synergies. But the excitement around David Jones and Country Road fizzled out in 2016 when sales growth began to lag those of average department store sales in Australia – 12% versus 5.3%. It became clear that management could not deliver on their overzealous expectations from the Australian operations. And the more than A$100 million annual incremental amount that would be added to the group’s earnings before interest & taxes that was promised to shareholders, is yet to materialise. In two years, the Woolworths share price has sunk by 43% from highs of R105.66 in November 2015 to R59.85 at the time of writing. Woolworths, a JSE top 40 stock, featured in the list of top ten worst performers in 2016. “It’s almost four years since David Jones was acquired and shareholder value has been destroyed.  Management needs to be held accountable for it,” said Gryphon Asset Management’s Treurnicht. One analyst, who didn’t want to be named, said the main beneficiary of the David jones purchase was investment bankers earning fees during acquisition negotiations and Australian billionaire Solomon Lew. Woolworths’ bid for David Jones almost fell apart as Lew refused to sell his 11.8% stake in Country Road Group –  a condition for the deal to be concluded.  He eventually forced Woolworths to pay a sizable A$209 million (R2 billion) for his Country Road shares. The impairment Using corporate speak, Woolworths calls David Jones a “noncash” impairment. Essentially, it lost cash for an asset in which shareholder cash was used to buy it.  The retailer said the impairment reflects a “tough and unprecedented trading conditions, a cyclical downturn and structural changes that have impacted performance across the Australian retail sector”. Treurnicht said these reasons are “ridiculous” and that Woolworths’ misfortunes in Australia are due to “David Jones being a bad acquisition”. Also, a number of own goals are the reason why Woolworths is being whipped in Australia. Woolworths’ push of its home-grown private label brands including Studio W and RE into David Jones stores flopped as the quality and fashionability of merchandise didn’t resonate with Australian shoppers. Woolworths is working on turnaround initiatives at David Jones – including overhauling merchandise and planning systems that will improve buying functions and stock availability, more investments in its online and in-store offering and recently introducing a high-end food service into David Jones. It will sink between A$75 million and A$100 million in turning David Jones around over the next three years. “David Jones is a large merger & acquisition that has gone pear-shaped. It’s probably not the end of Woolworths. They will probably fix David Jones in the next five years,” said Just One Lap founder Simon Brown.