At the beginning of the 2018 World Economic Forum, the chairperson, Professor Klaus Schwab, joined the dots between the Global Financial Crisis of 2008 and today. He had predicted that the financial crisis would be followed by an economic crisis and then a social crisis. Looking back over the last ten years until today, the financial crisis and economic crisis have passed, but it is of deep concern that we have not yet been able to resolve the social crisis. Just as it required extraordinary fiscal, monetary and macroeconomic policies to resolve the financial and economic issues, it also requires extraordinary measures to resolve the social ones. For too long, countries’ success has been measured almost solely by reference to economic growth, as measured by GDP. While useful, what the measurement of GDP cannot do is provide us with a sense of societal cohesion and resilience. Many countries with relatively high GDP growth rates have, over the last few years found themselves in a position of social fracture. How has this happened? In considering this question, we find that the implicit social contract between the economic stakeholders has broken down in some cases and is under threat in others. While being an inordinately complex question to consider, it has become increasingly apparent that in a broader context of capital and labour, the macroeconomic policies of the past have overtly favoured capital.  To address the issues of social crisis, it will require a much greater focus and debate on policies that shift away from this past approach. To facilitate such a dialogue, the WEF has published the Inclusive Development Index, made up of a number of metrics, measuring how countries perform in eleven dimensions of economic progress (including GDP.)  The index has three pillars: growth and development, inclusion and intergenerational equity. We all know the South African perspective – economic growth has lagged, income inequality remains one of the highest in the world, and savings rates remain too low. The Inclusive Development Index however, provides us with the means to compare ourselves to our peers. Unfortunately, we do not fare well. Out of 74 Emerging Economies, South Africa ranks 69th. Only Egypt, Zimbabwe, Malawi, Lesotho and Mozambique fare worse. Given the scale of natural and human resources that we have at our disposal, this is a serious indictment of our overall policy path, and must surely be a clarion call to all stakeholders, across all sectors of society to commit to a new approach going forward. It is easy to be filled with despair given the enormity of the situation and the shift required in the country’s mindset. It would also be an easy step, at a time of the perceived height of both private and public sector corruption, to recognise this defeatist attitude, with evidence of general cynicism from a downbeat public, and to not be hopeful. But, as the activist Rebecca Solnit, author of Hope in the Dark writes: “Hope is an embrace of the unknown and the unknowable, an alternative to the certainty of both optimists and pessimists. Optimists think it will all be fine without our involvement; pessimists adopt the opposite position; both excuse themselves from acting.” So what actions do we need from stakeholders? From politicians, we need for them to re-frame their positions of power back to that of being public servants, and to enact laws and legislation that promotes social cohesion. The Inclusive Development Index is a mirror we can hold up which tells us that for all the talk and lofty talk, it has been but lip-service. It is time to implement. From the private sector, and the CEOs in particular, real commitment is needed to address issues around income inequality, which means a profound cognisance of our place in the world. It is time for realisation of a responsibility to broader society, not just to shareholders. It is also not acceptable to be remunerated at levels which are enormous multiples of the lowest paid workers. From labour, a real commitment to find solutions through dialogue and contributing towards a shared future vision. There have been to many instances where collective bargaining has been a major obstacle to social progress, such as in the health and education space. It is time to realise that our future generations require us to make hard and sometimes painful decisions now. But inclusivity is not only about economic growth and a shared social compact around the division of the spoils between stakeholders. It is also about basic human rights, and access to opportunities. When we look back into our painful history, where colonialist, racist and sexist philosophies were part of the mainstream ideology, it becomes clear today, despite our remaining challenges, that progress has been made. But much remains to be done. We need leaders in all levels of society who are able to understand such issues, to transcend historical prejudices and more importantly formulate a shared vision for all of us. If we can do this then we will have signalled to the world that we are serious in our quest for social justice and inclusiveness. Arno Lawrenz is global investment strategist at Ashburton Investments.