The rand rose to its strongest since July 2015 on Tuesday as it crossed crucial technical points and ignited offshore buying interest. At 1508 GMT, the rand was up 0.28% to 12.20 against the dollar. Earlier in the session, the rand reached 12.19 per dollar, a new two-and-a-half year best, driven by what traders said was a conducive global environment and low liquidity that pushed the currency past the long-time target of 12.23. “Once the rand went through the key support level at 12.23, it is likely that a lot of stop-losses were triggered,” said senior trader at Standard Bank Oliver Alwar, adding that low levels of liquidity may have also extended the move. When trading began, investors were wary of a return of dollar strength after losses for most of the month, as markets price in the risk of policy tightening in other developed nations. In particular, speculation is growing the European Central Bank will start to slow its asset buying this year. Even so, the rand has remained a key carry-trade target, more so with the local central bank not expected to cut lending rates at its policy meeting on Thursday. “Investor sentiment towards (Deputy President Cyril) Ramaphosa combined with last night’s story about the Asset Forfeiture Unit has added to global optimism. And our yields also provide very good carry for international investors,” currency dealer at TreasuryOne Phillip Pearce said. A South African court froze R1.6 billion in assets earned by global consultancy McKinsey and a firm linked to friends of President Jacob Zuma, a source at the state prosecutors’ office told Reuters. Bonds were firmer, with the yield on the benchmark debt due in 2026 down 3.5 basis points to 8.475%. Stocks climbed to eight-week highs, as robust retail sales and solid earnings forecasts drove investor optimism about economic growth. The Johannesburg All Share Index was also buoyed by insurer MMI Holdings, the bourse’s second biggest gainer, after it announced that its chief executive officer will step down next month, as part of a management shake-up announced on Tuesday. The insurer’s share price rose 7.43% to R21.70. “In our view the announcement makes it clear that the board wants quicker execution of the strategy and feels that the existing senior management team was unable to deliver it without renewed focus,” said Nedbank Capital insurance analyst Grant Davids in a note. The All Share Index rose 0.68% to 60 649 points, while the Top 40 Index climbed 0.65% to 53 777 points. Clothing and homeware retailer The Foschini Group closed 5.17% higher at R181 after reporting a more than 30% jump in December sales, while food retailer Shoprite Holdings rose 3.29% to R220 after it said half-year turnover increased by 6.3%. Drugmaker Adcock Ingram forecast an at least 27% rise in half-year headline earnings per share, sending its shares up 5.80% to R63.47.