Here’s what caught our attention on Tuesday Power-utility Eskom is due to release its delayed interim results on Tuesday. The utility delayed publishing its results late last year, and the JSE then gave it an ultimatum to meet a deadline of January 31 or trading in Eskom’s bonds on the exchange would be suspended. The utility was downgraded by Moody’s over the weekend, despite a recent board reshuffle. Tuesday’s big reveal will suggest how deep in debt Eskom is, and for its own sake, how much funding it needs to get back on track. Keep an eye out for further details on Moneyweb. Mobile network provider MTN will be releasing its financial results for year ended December 31 2017 on Tuesday. The company said on Monday that the period’s performance is a significant 20% improvement in headline earnings per share and earnings per share in comparison to its previous results. MTN’s share price rose 0.7% higher at 9.13am on Monday, shortly after markets opened. Latest report by research group Viceroy reveals that Capitec Bank, a microfinance provider in South Africa, is a “loan shark”, and the provider should be put under curatorship by action of South Africa’s Reserve Bank and the Finance Minister. Viceroy said the bank’s loan book is “massively overstated”. Capitec’s bank shares has fallen over 3% since 10 am on Tuesday. Read: Viceroy takes aim at Capitec The embattled retail company has until Wednesday to publish consolidated financial statements for 2017. Late last year, Steinhoff’s shares dropped significantly after accounting irregularities were found in its financials. In January, the retailer announced that it would restate financials from as far back as 2015, which gave its stocks a slight boost since its very significant slump in December. Minister of Public Enterprises, Lynne Brown, and leadership of state-owned entities will be back in Parliament’s hot seat on Tuesday and will be answerable to the Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises over governance issues state-owned entities and what plans they have to address issues at these entities. The committee will also continue its inquiry into state capture and corporate governance at Eskom.