Here’s what caught our attention on Thursday 1. Sarb’s Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) to announce interest rate decision The South African Reserve Bank’s (Sarb’s) Monetary Policy Committee is due to announce its interest rates decision today. Economists are predicting that rates are most likely to be kept on hold. The rand strengthened in November last year, after Cyril Ramaphosa was elected as ANC President. The markets assumed a positive outlook and business confidence following this decision. Economists are saying that the MPC cannot afford to cut rates now, due to risks associated with the 2018/2019 fiscal budget and possible downgrades by Moody’s of the rand. 2. Mr Price and retail sales up Mr Price released its trading update for the third quarter of the financial year, which showed positive numbers in retail sales and other income. Corporate-owned and franchise stores generated total retail sales of R6.6 billion, an increase of 8.3%, Reuters reports. Retail sales as a whole is seeing a recovery. In November, figures rose by the biggest margin in more than five years, in clothing, footwear and furniture. The outlook for retail sales also seems positive due to the ‘Ramaphosa effect’ and consumer confidence. 3. McKinsey denies corruption reports International consultancy firm McKinsey’s director of external relations, Bonita Dordel, denied all allegations of corruption, saying it had not authorised any payments made by Eskom to Trillian Capital Partners, a company linked to the Gupta family. The Assets Forfeiture Unit (AFU) filed in an affidavit the corruptive dealings, money laundering and fraud practicing of Eskom, McKinsey and Trillian Capital Partners. The assets plus interest have amounted to R1.59 billion. 4. Eskom in talks to oust boss Eskom is in secret discussions to remove its boss, Matshela Koko. Koko was replaced by Willy Majoa as interim head of generation last week. Talks between parties are now centred around the amount Koko would take after agreeing to leave. Business Day is reporting that Eskom failed to take disciplinary and criminal action against Koko, when instructed by the independent forensic investigations last year and by its own forensic team. The money paid to Koko once he leaves, must be approved by National Treasury and the Minister of Public Enterprises. 5. Massmart to release sales update Massmart will be releasing its first sales update for 2018. In its last sales update, for the year ending December 31, Massmart reported that its total sales increased to R93.7 billion, which was 2.7% growth from the previous year of the same period. Massmart is the parent company to Game, Makro and Massbuild.