Here are some of the things people in markets are talking about today. Trump speech President Donald Trump is due to make his scheduled address to the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland at 8 am Eastern Time. While he’s expected to say his ‘America First’ agenda is good for the world, the president said his aim at the gathering of global elites is to draw investment to the US. Away from today’s events, White House officials offered Democrats a concession on immigration that forges a path to citizenship for so-called dreamers but includes a funding request for his flagship border wall. Dollar moves Markets this week have been dominated by greenback moves driven initially by comments from Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin, who was, in turn, chided by ECB president Mario Draghi at yesterday’s monetary-policy press conference. After Draghi’s intervention, Trump spoke in favor of a strong dollar, saying Mnuchin’s comments were “taken out of context.” The soothing words from the president may not be enough for the beleaguered US currency as analysts point to technical factors that could prolong its worst start to a year since 1987. GDP Depending on how long he speaks for, Trump could still be on his feet when fourth-quarter GDP for the US is published at 8:30 am Economist expectations are for an annualised 3% growth rate. GDP data in the UK, meanwhile, came in at a faster-than-expected 0.5% in the final quarter, but output in 2017 still expanded at the weakest pace in five years at 1.8%. Markets steady Overnight, the MSCI Asia Pacific Index was little changed, while Japan’s Topix index closed 0.3% lower, with the yen’s appreciation increasing concerns about profit outlooks. In Europe, the Stoxx 600 Index was 0.5% higher at 5:40 am with defensive industries leading the gains. S&P 500 futures added 0.2%, the 10-year Treasury yield was at 2.636% and gold was lower. Rig count Oil slipped from the week’s highs as the dollar gained on Trump’s supportive comments, with a barrel of West Texas Intermediate for March delivery trading at $65.63 at 5:40 am. US production remains the bogeyman for the oil outlook, with analysts closely watching today’s Baker Hughes rig count due at 1:00 pm for signs of increased drilling on the heels of last week’s surprise drop. © 2018 Bloomberg