Here’s what caught our attention on Friday:  The South African Reserve Bank (Sarb) announced yesterday that the repurchase rate remains at 6.75% for the third consecutive meeting. Prices won’t be going up, fortunately, but won’t be going down either. Reuters reported that Sarb expects inflation to remain within the target band of 3% to 6% until the end of 2019, at least. Sarb also lowered the forecast for average price growth this year to 4.9% and decreased the 2019 estimate to 5.4%. GDP growth was revised up to 0.9% for 2017 (0.7%), 1.4% for 2018 (1.2%) and 1.6% for 2019 (1.5%).  Eskom’s suspended chief financial officer, Anoj Singh, signed a secret deal binding the already cash-strapped utility to pay a R400 million ‘signature fee’ to an obscure offshore entity, for raising a R2 billion loan from China to refurbish power stations. Business Day has reported that the agreement was reached in October 2017 and was signed by Eskom Acting CEO Sean Maritz and Jianbao Chen of Huarong Energy Africa. The transaction is deemed unlawful after approval processes were not followed.  State-owned South African Airways (SAA) is seeking to recover debt of about R1.5 billion from Angola for ticket sales. SAA was in talks with the International Air Travel Association (Iata), the Angolan central bank and that country’s finance and transport ministries. Yesterday, SAA confirmed that some payments had been made to defray the debt. Business Day reported that the real value of the withheld funds is being diminished because of the devaluations of the Angolan kwanza.  Viceroy Research published a report on Steinhoff’s skeletons, a record of off-balance sheet entities inflating earnings, and obscuring losses on alleged financial irregularities at Steinhoff, after CEO Markus Jooste resigned. The firm is headed by 44-year old British citizen and ex-social worker John Fraser Perring and two Australian citizens, Gabriel Bernarde and Aidan Lau, both aged 23. Perring told Moneyweb that he had received death threats and his family would be at risk, if he revealed his identity.  South African Reserve Bank (Sarb) governor Lesetja Kganyago has been appointed as the head of the International Monetary Fund’s Monetary and Financial Committee. Kganyago will serve a three-year term on the IMF committee, Reuters reported. His responsibility will be to advise the IMF Board of Governors on the supervision and management of the international monetary and financial system. His term as governor of Sarb expires in 2019.