Billionaires, world leaders and investors are gathered in Davos, Switzerland, for the World Economic Forum’s annual meeting to hobnob and discuss topics ranging from the global economy and sexual harassment, to the risks and opportunities of artificial intelligence. Not to mention hear a speech on Friday by President Donald Trump. Here are the latest developments, updated throughout the day. (Time-stamps are local time in Davos.) Trump: new tax law is a ‘big beautiful waterfall’ (2:33 pm) Companies are giving bonuses to workers in the wake of the new tax law is a development his administration “didn’t anticipate,” President Donald Trump said. “All of the sudden it became like a waterfall, a big, beautiful waterfall.” Trump vows tougher line on trade (2:22 pm) “The United States will no longer turn a blind eye to unfair economic practices, including massive intellectual property theft, industrial subsidies and pervasive state-led economic planning,” President Donald Trump said in his speech. “We cannot have free and open trade if some countries exploit the system at the expense of others. We support free trade but it needs to be fair and it needs to be reciprocal because in the end unfair trade undermines us all.” Trump calls for US investment, fair trade (2:18 pm) “America is the place to do business, so come to America,” Trump tells the world’s elite. “I believe in America. As president of the United States I will always put America first, just like the leaders of other countries should put their country first also. But America first does not mean America alone.” “The United States is prepared to negotiate mutually beneficial trade agreements with all countries,” including those in TPP, Trump says. Trump trumpets US economy (2:10 pm) “I’m here today to represent the interests of the American people and to affirm America’s friendship and partnership in building a better world,” President Donald Trump said. “America hopes for a future in which everyone can prosper and every child can grow up free from violence, poverty and fear.” “The world is witnessing the resurgence of a strong and prosperous America,” he said. Trump urges to not ignore the ‘forgotten’ (2:06 pm) “Only by hearing and responding to the voices of the forgotten can we create a bright future that is truly shared by all,” according to excerpts of President Donald Trump’s speech released by the White House. “As president of the United States, I will always put America First,” Trump says. “But America First does not mean America alone.” He adds that the US will insist on fair and reciprocal trade agreements. “When the United States grows, so does the world,” Trump says. Mnuchin says FX comments weren’t intervention (1:18 pm) US Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin said his weak-dollar comments were “in no way any intention to violate the commitment that we’re not trying to intervene in currency markets.” He told the Wall Street Journal that the remarks were “completely taken out of context.” The comments were a simple “statement of fact about the impact of a weaker dollar in the short term. I wasn’t intending to endorse it or encourage it in any way.” Trump holds court (12:42 pm) Reminiscent of President Donald Trump’s own Cabinet meetings, top executives from Europe’s most important companies took turns trying to impress him at a gathering in the Swiss Alps. “So are you going to be investing in the US?” Trump asked Bayer CEO Werner Baumann as TV cameras rolled. When Baumann described a $16 billion investment near St. Louis, the president nodded his approval before turning to the next chief executive. Dollar will get stronger, Trump says (12:27 pm) Trump predicted the dollar will strengthen due to accelerating US economic growth. “We are doing so well, our country is becoming so economically strong again – and strong in other ways too, by the way – that the dollar is going to get stronger and stronger,” Trump said in an interview with CNBC. There is no alternative to the dollar as a reserve currency, he added. Action needed on Bitcoin risks (12:16 pm) The international community needs to act to counter the risks presented by Bitcoin, according to European Central Bank Executive Board member Benoit Coeure. “I will expect for instance a G-20 discussion in Buenos Aires in March to focus very much on these issues with a regulatory answer,” Coeure said during a Bloomberg-hosted panel discussion. BofA bemoans capital rules (12:00 pm) Bank of America Corporation has about $20 billion of “extra capital” and the whole banking industry is required to hold too much, Chief Executive Officer Brian Moynihan said. Bank of America could make additional loans worth $160 billion if it were allowed to hold 1 percent less capital, Moynihan said in interview with Bloomberg Television. Dollar’s reserve-currency status under review (11:38 am) The dollar’s position as the world’s main reserve currency is under review, according to Ray Dalio, founder and co-chief investment officer of Bridgewater Associates. “I do believe currency will be a big issue this year as there’s a reconsideration of how important the dollar is,” Dalio said on a panel discussion. Markets testing US’s weak-dollar resolve (11:16 am) Markets are seeing how far the US is ready to accept a weak dollar, UBS chairman Axel Weber said on a panel. “The US position has always been very outspoken to focus on the strong dollar being in the interest of the US If there is some deviation from that, markets are looking at it and saying shall we test that new proposition. I think in the end the US will come back to the proposition that a strong dollar is in the US interest.” Currency volatility unhelpful (11:09 am) The G20 group of rich nations should stick to an agreement not to target exchange rates for competitive purposes, ECB’s Coeure said. “We have seen a lot of volatility created recently by different statesmen, and I think that it’s not helpful,” Coeure said during a panel hosted by Bloomberg. Tsinghua Tongfang mulls listing units overseas (11:08 am) Tsinghua Tongfang will create as many as three new listed companies, President Huang Yu said in an interview. Company considers listing of security equipment arm Nuctech and also environmental protection and internet units. Europe worried about US trade policy (10:33 am) Europe is concerned about US trade policy under President Donald Trump, according to the European Commission’s Vice President for Jobs, Growth, Investment and Competitiveness, Jyrki Katainen. “We are a bit worried about the development in the US because we want to avoid, for whatever the price, a trade war,” Katainen said in an interview with Bloomberg Television. “It’s harmful for everybody, and we do hope that President Trump would look at trade and multilateral cooperation more positively in the future.” France takes issues with dollar remarks (10:17 am) Bank of France Governor Francois Villeroy de Galhau joined a chorus of officials defending a global pledge to refrain from currency devaluations. Referring to a statement issued by members of the International Monetary Fund in October, Villeroy said in a Bloomberg Television interview: “What we all said, including the new US administration, was that we will not target our exchange rates for competitive purposes. This sentence is very important. It remains the rule of the game. It’s a rule of mutual trust.” Canada labour market slack (9:53 am) Canada has “considerable slack” remaining in its labor market, according to Bank of Canada Governor Stephen Poloz. “What happens in this late stage in the cycle is that investment becomes the principle driver of growth, and that builds more capacity, pulling that capacity out of the labor market and raising potential output in the economy,” Poloz said in an interview with Bloomberg Television. Trump to promote US business, urge joint action (9:52 am) US President Donald Trump will say there’s no better time to invest in the US during his speech on Friday, according to a senior administration official. In a speech lasting about 15 minutes, Trump will urge the international community to work together to combat terrorism and thwart North Korea’s nuclear ambitions, the official said. Trump tariffs open door for EU, Danish PM says (9:39 am) US President Donald Trump’s decision to impose tariffs on selected products will ultimately create opportunities for Europe to step in and benefit from the shift in global trade dynamics, Danish Prime Minister Lars Lokke Rasmussen said. Still, the signals from Trump on trade are “not good for the world economy, honestly speaking,” he said in a Bloomberg Television interview. Ireland mulling bank stake sales (9:16 am) Ireland is monitoring the value of the state’s banking assets as it considers possible sales, Finance Minister Paschal Donohoe said. In an interview with Bloomberg Television, Donohoe added that Ireland wants a seat on the European Central Bank’s executive board and will decide imminently if it will nominate someone to succeed Vice President Vitor Constancio. Natixis IM sees risks on the rise (9:04 am) There’s “more chances that risk goes up than it goes down” in markets, Jean Raby, CEO of Natixis Investment Managers, said in a Bloomberg Television interview. The company will seek “bolt-on” acquisitions and potentially bigger deals. Europe wary of US tax reform (8:51 am) Europe needs to carefully assess the consequences of the US tax reform, Economic and Financial Affairs Commissioner Pierre Moscovici said. “We have sent letters, five ministers from the EU and the Commission to the Secretary of the Treasury and, well, they responded orally, but I think when you send a letter you need to have a response,” Moscovici said in an interview with Bloomberg Television. ECB doesn’t target exchange rate (8:36 am) The European Central Bank doesn’t target exchange rates for competitive purposes, Bank of France Governor Francois Villeroy de Galhau said. “Our only mandate is about price stability,” Villeroy de Galhau, a member of the ECB’s governing council, said in an interview with Bloomberg Television. “What we look at is the effects on the inflation outlook.” Davos takes on sexual harassment (8:30 am) In its own way, the #MeToo moment has come to Davos. At least two panels tackled sexual harassment head on, the first time in recent history it’s been a topic of official discussion at the World Economic Forum. The forum’s seven co-chairs this year were women, and while the attendees are still overwhelmingly male, among the younger set, half are female. The “Girls Lounge,” a woman-centered space at the event, was renamed the “Equality Lounge.” Bankers tout dealmaking boom (8:29 am) A global boom in dealmaking is set to continue this year as companies use cheap funds for acquisitions and sell more shares to the public, according to top bankers at JPMorgan Chase & Co. and Deutsche Bank. OECD says countries showing reform fatigue (8:16 am) Complacency is worst enemy for economy as structural reforms are slowing down at a time they should be accelerating to take advantage of the upturn, OECD General Secretary Angel Gurria says in Bloomberg Radio interview. May rebukes Hammond for ‘modest’ Brexit (8:08 am) Prime Minister Theresa May’s office slapped down Philip Hammond for saying he hoped Brexit would bring only modest changes, after his comments enraged the euroskeptic lawmakers May needs to stay in her job. Advertising industry set for growth (7:59 am) The advertising market is set to expand as economic growth strengthens, Publicis chairman Maurice Levy predicted. The US tax reform has changed the state of mind of top company executives “quite dramatically” and they are “very optimistic,” Levy said in an interview with Bloomberg Television. Trump apologises for retweets (7:55 am) President Donald Trump made a rare public apology on Friday for retweeting anti-Muslim videos posted by a British political activist two months ago, a social media misstep that hurt US relations with the UK. Retweets can “cause problems,” Trump said in an interview taped in Davos, Switzerland, with Piers Morgan of the UK’s ITV channel. Collaboration message finds takers (7:55 am) Cooperate, collaborate. That’s the overarching message from Davos this year for Mitsubishi Heavy Industries Ltd. Chairman Hideaki Omiya, echoing comments by Carlos Ghosn head of the Renault-Nissan auto alliance. For any one company, “it is not possible to do every single thing,” Omiya said in an interview. “It is necessary to have some collaboration.” UBS sees acceleration of M&A (7:50 am) UBS Investment Bank head Andrea Orcel says in Bloomberg Television interview in Davos that the acceleration of big deals in the fourth quarter should continue into 2018. Risks to global economy include asset bubble (7:43 am) Global economy faces risks but is set for strong 2018, Charles-Edouard Bouee, CEO of Munich-based consultancy Roland Berger, says in interview with Bloomberg Radio. “It seems the world has become more agile, able to sustain systemic risk problems we have seen like Brexit and Trump,” he said. Trump time (7:25 am) It’s finally time for the US president to speak with his keynote address at 2 pm He’s expected to tell the world’s elite gathered in the resort town that his “America First” agenda will be good for the world — not just the US Last night he began making that case at a reception and dinner with business leaders. “It was very interesting and casual,” said Patrick Pouyanne, the chief executive of French oil giant Total SA. Less positive was billionaire George Soros, who wasn’t invited to meet Trump. He told an audience elsewhere in town that the president is a “ danger to the world.” Meantime, Big Tech struck a conciliatory note, Artificial Intelligence approached the summit of hype and bankers are still dancing. Friday’s highlights: Here’s what happened on Thursday: © 2018 Bloomberg