Billionaires, world leaders and investors are gathered in Davos, Switzerland, for the World Economic Forum’s annual meeting to hobnob and discuss topics ranging from the global economy and sexual harassment, to the risks and opportunities of artificial intelligence. Not to mention hear a speech by President Donald Trump. Here are the latest developments, updated throughout the day. (Time-stamps are local time in Davos.) Strong euro brings benefits (10:30 am) A stronger euro has benefits for the single currency area, according to Irish Prime Minister Leo Varadkar. “Bear in mind it keeps inflation down and interest rates down,” Varadkar said in an interview with Bloomberg Television. Varadkar urged the US not to restrict free trade, which he said brings advantages for all nations. Italian banks in better shape (10:13 am) The Italian banking system is in “much better shape now,” according to Cassa Depositi e Prestiti Chairman Claudio Costamagna. There are three to four major transactions that may happen in terms of consolidation, Costamagna said, adding that he doesn’t see any of those to happen in the next three to six months. US warns Turkey on Syria (9:41 am) Tom Bossert, the US homeland security adviser, warned of “grave consequences” from any miscalculation as Turkey’s military pushes deeper into Syria to confront US-backed Kurdish militant groups. Turkey should be mindful of conflict with proxy forces, especially if there are possible US advisers in the area, Bossert told reporters. Hammond on financial services (9:40 am) UK Chancellor Philip Hammond insisted that financial services have to be part of any trade deal with the European Union, “with some sort of enhanced equivalence regime.” In an interview with Bloomberg Television, Hammond said that “it has to be robust, objectively determined — not on the whim of the EU Commission.” Dollar move may placate US: Hammond (9:22 am) A weaker dollar may help alleviate US concerns about the “fairness” of global trade, according to UK Chancellor Philip Hammond. “Hopefully, the depreciation of the US dollar and the opportunities that creates will help to create a sense of a more level playing field without having to reach for tariffs,” Hammond said in an interview with Bloomberg Television. Hammond happy with pound (9:16 am) “We’re very happy with where the currency is at the moment,” Hammond said, adding that a stronger pound will tame inflation and help real wages. Dollar to stay dominant (9:10 am) The US dollar isn’t going to be replaced by China’s yuan as the world’s top reserve currency any time soon, according to HSBC Holding. “I don’t think the US dollar’s position at this point is anything other that dominant,” Mark Tucker, the bank’s new chairman, said. Barclays revenues ‘roughly flat’ (9:10 am) Barclays chief executive officer Jes Staley said revenues at the bank were “roughly flat” over the year. “I do think we are going to see renewed volatility in financial markets and that will be very positive for our trading business,” Staley said in an interview with Bloomberg Television. Ross silent on steel tariffs (9:04 am) US Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross declined to say whether he recommended steel and aluminum tariffs to President Trump. “The president is very much more interested in bilateral arrangements,” Ross told reporters. “You’ll see what is the content of the report after he decides to release it, after he’s made his decision.” USD reflects liquid market: Mnuchin (9:00 am) “Where the market is in the short term reflects a very, very liquid market, there’s lots of things that affect the market,” US Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin told reporters. Mnuchin defends dollar comments (8:54 am) Mnuchin defended his comments on Wednesday when he said a weak dollar is good for US trade. “I thought my comment on the dollar was actually quite clear yesterday,” Mnuchin said. “I thought it was balanced and consistent with what I said before.” BBVA warns of Bitcoin risk (8:48 am) Bitcoin is a highly risky asset, BBVA CEO Carlos Torres says in an interviewwith Bloomberg Television. “If you invest in Bitcoin, it has to be money thatyou can afford to lose.” Europe telecom consolidation over (8:45 am) Most of the telecom industry’s consolidation in Europe is over as carriers are more focused on investment, according to Orange CEO Stephane Richard. Richard added that he doesn’t expect the French government to sell its 23 percent stake in Orange in the short term. Ukraine to accelerate reforms (8:33 am) Ukraine will accelerate reforms and continue its cooperation with the International Monetary Fund, President Petro Poroshenko said in a speech. No time for currency war, Lagarde says (8:10 am) The International Monetary Fund supports floating currencies and market-determined rates, according to IMF Managing Director Christine Lagarde. “It’s not time to have any kind of currency war,” Lagarde said in an interview with Bloomberg Television. Lagarde also urged Germany to use its surplus to increase government spending. Waiting on Trump (7:05 am) US President Donald Trump lands in Davos on Thursday, planning to tell the global elite that his “America First” agenda is good for globalisation and that the growing US economy and booming stock market show they were wrong to doubt him. European leaders are nevertheless still banging the drum for free trade. While it’s Trump’s first time at the World Economic Forum’s gathering he knows plenty of people here as our DataViz shows. Scientists and academics visiting the Alpine town are also concerned about the outlook. Thursday’s Highlights: Here’s what happened on Wednesday: © 2018 Bloomberg