Here’s what caught our attention on Wednesday: 1. IMF and Sarb meeting The managing director of the International Monetary Fund, Christine Lagarde and the governor of the South African Reserve Bank, Lesetja Kganyago will be addressing the media on the state and on developments regarding South Africa’s economy at 16:00 on Wednesday. Lagarde is visiting South Africa as part of her annual tour to African countries. The briefing will follow a meeting between the two parties. 2. Keeping SA’s engine running The government is well aware of the number of problems that need to be fixed, at the top of the list, is the case of state-owned enterprises such as Eskom, the SABC and SAA. The government is also under more pressure as elections near. According to Bloomberg many economists are saying that until then, there’s a chance that no major changes or decisions will be made to fix ailing parastatals. In this game, politics come first. Read: Fixing SOEs comes second to politics. 3. Treasury in search of Sars boss Since the dismissal of former Sars boss Tom Moyane in November, and the recent dismissal of his request to get his job back, Treasury is on the lookout for a candidate to occupy the position permanently. The department advertised the position in the newspapers over the weekend. Candidates have until January 18, 2019 to submit their CVs. Ramaphosa has set up a panel to shortlist and interview potential candidates before making a recommendation to him, EWN reported. 4. Jacob Zuma’s meddling in Zim land costs him The Constitutional Court made a ruling on December 11 that former President Jacob Zuma had no right to co-sign a Southern African Development Community decision in 2014, to end a challenge to Zimbabwe’s seizure of white-owned farmers without compensation – after the farmers challenged it at the tribunal. According to Bloomberg, Zuma breached the Constitution when he signed the decision. It has now being taken to President Cyril Ramaphosa to reverse. Read: Zuma’s legal mire deepens as Zimbabwe’s farmers seek $133m 5. Health department goes easy on pharma sector An increase of 3.78% in 2019 of the single exit price of medicines and scheduled substances was gazetted by the health minister, Aaron Motsoaledi. The pharmaceutical industry welcomes the increase, saying it properly reflects operational costs of local manufacturers, compared to the 1.2% increase granted for 2018. Read: Pharma sector breathes sigh of relief over 2019 pricing