Ready to fulfil the lifelong dream of boarding a plane, starting a business, building a home, ready for retirement – these were just some of the wishes expressed by South African lottery winners in the last six months of this year. Receiving a large sum of money can be overwhelming and challenging for anyone, regardless of whether the windfall is due to a lottery ticket, an inheritance or even an annual bonus. Eric Enslin, chief executive of FNB Private Wealth and RMB Private Bank, says that the majority of high-net worth individuals and families are advised to prepare heirs for their inheritance well in advance, but this does not always happen. “In some cases, heirs are either too young to grasp the context of the conversation, or simply get overwhelmed when reality sets in,” he adds. Key considerations when you receive a windfall So, what should you be aware of if you happen to receive a large sum of money that can make a significant difference to your life? Consult a financial advisor: An advisor can help you with a financial needs analysis that gives you a snapshot of your unique financial circumstances and can guide you with regards to your investment choices. Cut out the emotion: Enslin notes that when it comes to a sudden inflow of substantial wealth, there is often an emotional and psychological reaction. “Avoid putting yourself under pressure to make important decisions immediately,” he says. Taking the time to come to terms with reality and managing a gradual transition in lifestyle can pay dividends in the long run. Keep it quiet: There is no immediate rush to quit your day job. This decision should be evaluated carefully and after you have taken time to review your circumstances. Enslin says you may find it makes sense to continue working and to use your salary to pay for your living expenses while investing your windfall for the long-term or for the benefit of your heirs. Set aside funds for emergency savings: Craig Gradidge of Mahura Investments says ideally you should have the equivalent of six months of your salary invested for emergencies. “Your emergency savings should be liquid and protected so that the money is available when you need it. If you are unsure if this is the case, test the process by trying to disinvest a portion and see if there are obstacles, or penalties, and how quickly the funds land in your bank account,” he says. Curb the expenditure: When there is a sudden abundance of money, it is easy to get swept away on a tide of reckless spending or well-intentioned generosity towards family and friends. You should consult an advisor and have a plan in place for the money before you start spoiling either yourself or your loved ones. Invest in a tax-free savings account: Janet Hugo, Financial Planner of the Year 2018, says in general, investors should embrace tax breaks. There is no tax on the growth within tax-free funds which accelerates growth, and the withdrawals are not subject to capital gains tax. Hugo notes that these investments are also not subject to Regulation 28 which means that your allocation to offshore assets can exceed 40%. However, she points out that one of the disadvantages is that although structured primarily for retirement, a tax-free investment does form part of your estate when you die, unlike pension and provident funds, and retirement annuities. What should you do first – reduce debt or invest? Hugo says this decision is seldom straightforward. Factors to be taken into account include your after-tax return on investments, personal debt and credit card interest rates, mortgage interest rates, inflation and human emotion. Gradidge says that the savings achieved by settling debt can be hard to beat in returns generated from many investments currently. Hugo agrees, noting that although she advises clients to pay off expensive debt such as personal loans and credit cards, there are several factors to consider when it comes to paying off a mortgage. “Mortgages work well for investors who are spendthrift as they involve enforced contributions to a growth asset. Mortgages also work well if they’re for an investment property as the interest portion of the contributions is tax-deductible, so it is important to keep the mortgage at a rate where you can claim a tax deduction. There is also value in access mortgages, which you can dip into for unforeseen emergency expenses,” she says. Hugo says your time horizon is a significant factor when making the decision between reducing debt and investing. “If you are young and can afford the risk of an aggressive portfolio, there’s merit in keeping a mortgage because the post- tax return on the investment in the long run is likely to be greater than a mortgage rate. However, if you are nearing retirement, it would make more sense to pay off your mortgage,” she says. The views and opinions shared in this article belong to their author, cannot be construed as financial advice, and do not necessarily mirror the views and opinions of Moneyweb.