There is concern that a proposal to introduce maximum drawdown limits for living annuities in a default strategy could result in large numbers of retirees turning their backs on a retirement income strategy specifically designed to benefit them. The Financial Sector Conduct Authority (FSCA) recently published the draft criteria for living annuities in a default annuity strategy. The default regulations – an effort to improve retirement outcomes – require retirement funds to implement a default investment, default preservation and annuity strategy, and to make retirement benefits counselling available to members. Defaults are automatic choices made on behalf of retirement fund members who do not exercise their choices in a given situation. In the case of an annuity strategy – which should represent a fund’s best proposal for the average member of the fund – this would be a soft default, and members would need to ‘opt in’ instead of ‘opt out’. The regulations will take effect on March 1, 2019. The vast majority of retirees choose living annuities at retirement as regulation allows them to draw between 2.5% and 17.5% of their money as income each year, thereby allowing for a higher initial income than a guaranteed annuity, but the retiree carries the risk that their money may run out if markets don’t perform, they draw too much or if they live longer than expected. According to the Association for Savings and Investment South Africa (Asisa), living annuity policyholders withdrew 6.64% of their capital as income in 2017 on average. The table below sets out the maximum drawdown rates proposed by the FSCA: Age Males Females 55 4.5% 4% 60 5% 4.5% 65 5.5% 5% 70 5.5% 5% 75 6% 5.5% 80 7% 6% 85 8% 7% Johan Gouws, head of institutional consulting at Sasfin Wealth, says the proposed maximum drawdowns will cause most members to rather purchase a living annuity from a third party in the retail market where they could still draw up to 17.5% annually. Members need to be cognisant of not depleting their retirement capital, but many members will just not be able to survive on their monthly income as a result of the proposed drawdown limit on default living annuities. Choosing a third party retail living annuity would put retiring members back in a position where there would be no seamless transfer of their retirement fund benefits from pre- to post-retirement and could expose them to market timing risk and result in unnecessary transaction fees. Having to select a third party living annuity could require a change in the investment strategy from pre- to post-retirement, financial advice would have to be sought at retail market rates, and retail platform and portfolio fees could be significantly higher than a fund’s default living annuity option, Gouws says. “The original objective of the default annuity regulations for living annuities would therefore become obsolete for many members choosing a living annuity for monthly income purposes during retirement,” he adds. Indemnity option? Gouws says he would propose that the limits be applied as a recommended guideline, but that a member should still be able to draw an income at a higher rate than prescribed subject to guidance received from the retirement fund’s counsellor. Members could also sign an indemnity whereby they recognise the risks related to drawing a higher income than the recommended limits. In this way members can still benefit from a seamless pre- to post-retirement investment strategy transition, lower investment and administration costs, and avoiding market timing risk. Petri Greeff, head of investment advisory at RisCura, says unsustainable drawdown rates in living annuities is a significant problem. The proposal is an effort to ensure retirees draw a sustainable income, but the proposed maximum drawdown rates would be so unattractive – particularly for people who haven’t saved enough and who wouldn’t be able to cover their expenses at these drawdowns – that they would rather not opt into the default annuity arrangement. “Members are not automatically required to make a decision by opting in. This is a potential flaw in the design of the default annuity strategy, exacerbated by the maximum drawdown limits, and could lead to even fewer members opting in.” For women in particular – who generally earn less than their male counterparts, take time off to raise children and live longer on average – the proposed maximum drawdowns will be hard to swallow, and would discourage them from choosing the default annuity, he adds. Olano Makhubela, divisional executive for retirement funds at the FSCA, says the premise informing the default regulations is based on behavioural economics – in particular, that carefully designed policies, regulations and products can nudge and encourage people to do the right thing for themselves. “By design, defaults allow for people to ‘opt out’ if special circumstances dictate accordingly. Generally, many people tend to settle with the defaults,” he says. Popular but risky While living annuities remain popular, they also contain inherent risks like longevity and market risk. “Given their popularity, it was decided that the best way to protect retirees would be to still allow them as part of the annuity strategy and despite associated risks, but then to regulate them. However, to be part of the annuity strategy, it was equally important to provide a certain basic level of protection not found in other non-default living annuities, while remaining within the permissible minimum withdrawal rate of 2.5% in the Income Tax Act.” Makhubela says given that these are defaults, members have a right not to opt in, but default regulations are designed to take advantage of the bargaining power of funds to negotiate better deals for their members, thereby providing a more cost-effective solution than if members were to shop for a living annuity on their own. Bargaining power “We hope that the combination of this bargaining power and compulsory benefit counselling will encourage members to opt in once they realise the value offered by their fund’s strategy.” Based on actuarial modelling, the tighter withdrawal limits should reasonably protect the average retiree from running out of capital too soon. The performance of these defaults will be monitored by the FSCA. The aim of the drawdown limits is to prescribe an enforceable and more sustainable level at which a living annuity can be drawn down, thereby providing these retirees with some basic protection compared to other living annuities, Makhubela says. Asisa provides a standard on living annuities for the industry, but this is not law and cannot be enforced by the FSCA. The Asisa standard also suggests slightly higher drawdown limits than the FSCA’s draft standard. “If the fund’s annuity strategy is properly explained to a retiring member, we do not believe that most members will opt for a third party living annuity.” Makhubela says the regulations should be assessed holistically, particularly considering the introduction of retirements benefits counselling. Moreover, the distinction between retail and institutional rates is not the only driver behind the defaults. A default living annuity complying with the requirements of the conduct standard can be provided by a pension fund, together with other similarly priced options should retirees wish to take additional risks for themselves. Stakeholders have until January 14 to comment on the draft criteria.