Here’s what caught our attention on Friday: 1. New CEO appointed for Denel Daniel Du Toit has been appointed as the new CEO of troubled state-owned arms dealer, Denel. The company has been in the spotlight recently for being tight on cash after years of mismanagement. On Thursday, Reuters also reported that the PIC has quietly been buying the firm’s bonds for the past twelve months. Read: PIC buys up Denel’s bonds 2. Nersa asked to halt IPP The Nelson Mandela Bay Business Chamber, which represents about 700 businesses and is advocating for affordable electricity tariffs for Eskom, has asked energy regulator Nersa to halt the rollout of new Independent Power Producers, mainly because of the impact it has on Eskom. According to Moneyweb, the business chamber made the recommendation to Nersa in response to Eskom’s application to recover revenue amounting to R762 billon through increased tariffs over the next three fiscal years. 3. The Necsa ball keeps rolling The axed board members of Necsa are putting up a strong fight against their dismissal and claim that the reason for their dismissal by energy minister, Jeff Radebe is due to the intention to sell the company to a US firm. Necsa is denying these claims by the board members, saying the claims are ‘ridiculous’. Read: Nuclear company denies privatisation claims 4. The 2019 tourism outlook With a number of policy changes coming into play, tourism minister, Derek Hanekom says 2019 will be a promising year for tourism. According to Moneyweb, the minister says that the relaxing of visa regulations will be key in bolstering tourism alongside the prospect of the Cape drought coming to an end. He expects strong growth beyond the 7% mark for 2019. Read: SA bound for tourism growth in 2019 5. Rand update The rand had a moment to breathe as concern grows in the US over policymakers increasing interest rates. The rand was at 14.23 to the dollar at 15:11 on Thursday, but reversed its gains in early trade. On Friday, the rand was at R14.36 at 8:44. Moneyweb wishes you well over the festive season.