In a seemingly unexpected announcement on Friday, Absa Group informed the market of its medium-term financial targets. It said these are based on the group’s “current expectations for economic growth in South Africa and [its presence countries in the rest of Africa]”. It revealed that “Barring any unforeseen major macroeconomic or regulatory developments, key targets include: It added that it reiterated its guidance for 2018 “including that … normalised return on equity is expected to increase slightly from our 16.5% in 2017”. The timing of the announcement seemed off-piste until one realised that Absa was hosting an investor day focused on its retail and business banking unit at the same time. At the investor day, executives at its South African retail and business banking unit (RBB SA), under new CEO Arrie Rautenbach, detailed plans to turn it around. Read: Absa: Here’s what’s wrong with its retail bank But one needs to go back to 2014, where the then-Barclays Africa Group “committed” itself to “clear financial targets”: Sound familiar? It barely scraped a ‘pass’ on these four scores. At the end of 2017, the group said it remained “top three by revenue in four of our largest businesses – Botswana, Ghana, South Africa, and Zambia”, with Kenya being the laggard. And it has exceeded its revenue share target for units outside its home market since 2015 (20.8%, 22.5% and 22% in the three years to 2017). But try what it might, it cannot get a return on equity above 17. Source: Absa H1 2018 financials And its cost-to-income ratio remains stubbornly high. The group’s normalised cost-to-income ratio (to remove distortion caused by International Financial Reporting Standards, or IFRS) in the first half was 56.2. Source: Absa H1 2018 financials The issue is squarely in RBB SA, given that it is 54% of headline earnings (58% of income, and 60% of operating expenses). In H1 2018, cost-to-income for this unit was 58.3 (from 56.6 a year prior). Assuming operating expense growth of 7% a year (entirely reasonable, based on the recent past), it needs to grow the top line by 10% to achieve its target by 2021. If it hits double-digit income growth, cost-to-income for RBB SA will be under 55% in three years’ time. The first difficulty, of course, is that income growth for 2018 to June was a paltry 4%, versus a 7% increase in expenses. (It’s not going to be able to save its way to its target, despite the expenses it’s taking out of the business at present.) Double-digit growth is a huge ask in an economy that’s barely growing, and in a market that is increasingly competitive. So, on its previous scorecard, it struggled. Craig Bond, who joined the group from Standard Bank in 2012 to head up RBB SA, left the bank earlier this year after he was effectively sidelined in a restructure in 2017. In ‘Here’s whats wrong with Absa’s retail bank’, I argued that its executives – and I’m referring to Rautenbach and Group CEO Maria Ramos in particular – have practically staked their careers on turning this retail business around. There’s no more ‘Barclays influence’ to hide behind. Fix retail, and it will achieve at least two of the new targets. It sounds deceptively simple, especially on paper. It would be fine, had the other four large banks been navel-gazing. But they haven’t. Even if some hadn’t, the plan for retail and business banking as well as these targets would be fine had a handful of very ambitious and well-funded competitors not been launching banks in 2019. Never mind a clearly resurgent African Bank. Any bets on how Absa will score come 2021? * Hilton Tarrant works at YFM. He can still be contacted at hilton@moneyweb.co.za.