Here’s what caught our attention on Wednesday: 1. Standard Bank PMI Standard Bank’s Purchasing Manufacturing Index for November is expected to be released on Wednesday. In October, the Standard Bank PMI decreased to 46.90 from 48 in September. The October decline was the steepest since July 2014 and, according to Trading Economics, was a result of the fall in foreign demand amid currency volatility. 2. Fuel prices decrease on Wednesday The year was tough on South Africans, so as a gift this December, fuel prices are taking a plunge on Wednesday. The price of petrol will fall by R1.84 a litre and the price of diesel will drop by R1.45 a litre. The price drop comes after the rand gained against the dollar during the period under review. Read: Petrol price to plunge by R1.84/l 3. What’s on the cards for SA post recession? In case you didn’t hear, South Africa’s gross domestic product expanded by 2.2% on Tuesday, giving the economy a break and pulling it out of a recession. Manufacturing and agricultural sectors were the main boosters of growth during the quarter. Despite the optimism in the air, experts are saying Eskom’s power shortages, low confidence levels and next year’s looming elections remain a concern for growth. Read: SA escapes recession, but.. 4. Parliament gives the thumbs up to bill on land reform Nothing goes down without a fight in South Africa, and the case of land reform is no exception. On Tuesday, members of parliament met to debate the report on land reform and the recommendations to change the Constitution in favour of land expropriation without compensation. A majority of members approved the report, but opposition party the DA is unhappy with the outcome and plans to take the matter to court. Read: Parliament endorses report on disputed land reform 5. Rand update Global economics are weighing on the performance of the rand as doubts over the US-China trade truce heighten. The rand is hovering between the R13 and R14 mark. On Wednesday, the rand was at R13.86 to the dollar at 8:26.