Let’s say you’re trying to make trade peace with China. Do you: If you chose “all of the above,” then you are in the Trump administration, apparently. Huawei is China’s flagship tech company, and this is not exactly the kind of thing you do if you’re trying to calm tensions with China. It is possible Xi and Trump had a laugh about it over drinks. But China seemed pretty angry about it today. And it’s hard to understand what the point is here. There are other ways to do something about alleged Huawei misdeeds than throwing the founder’s daughter in the hoosegow. Was this carefully considered, or is it, as Tim Culpan asks, just a clumsy shakedown? If Trump does nothing more than squeeze cash out of Huawei, as ended up happening with ZTE Co., then it may not accomplish much. Better to use this leverage to make some real headway on curbing China’s intellectual-property theft, Tim suggests. As Eli Lakewrites, Huawei has been a huge technology security risk for years, but arresting executives over sanctions violations doesn’t solve that particular problem. So far it has been hard to see much tangible benefit from Trump’s create-crisis/pretend-to-resolve-crisis trade-war strategy, but maybe that’s because we’re measuring success the wrong way. Ramesh Ponnuru suggests even a losing trade war could benefit Trump in the way that matters to him the most: winning re-election. Markets have trouble with the curves Trade-war uncertainty and other anxieties hit stocks again today. Jared Dillian suggests markets – in bonds, homebuilder and tech stocks, and oil, to name a few – are telling us a recession is unavoidable. And we shouldn’t fear it, Jared writes; it will help clear out the inefficiencies and bubbles. One thing freaking stocks out is the yield curve’s inversion – short-term interest rates turning higher than long-term ones, which is sort of like dogs lying down with cats. But only a small part of the rate universe has sunk into The Upside Down. And Brian Chappatta points out one key interest rate, that of the 2-year Treasury note, fell a lot today. To Brian, this matters more than the curve inversion and suggests traders are starting to think the Fed might be done cutting rates for this cycle. That would be good news for the stock market. Anyway, Stephen Gandel writes, another key interest-rate gap – the spread between corporate borrowing costs and safe Treasury rates – is still near its historic average, no sign of financial pressure. Nir Kaissarsuggests another rate spread to watch, the one between the market’s earnings yield and the return on cash. Almost every time this turns negative, a bear market follows. It’s not underwater yet, but it’s been moving in the wrong direction. Seeking  a Brexit off-ramp UK parliament is due to vote next week on Theresa May’s Brexit plan, and it looks like she’s going to lose – the vote, maybe her job, maybe the very idea of Brexiting. It could be a chaotic mess (more than usual), and the European Union should help with the cleanup, Bloomberg’s editorial board writes. First, it would be useful if an EU court lets the UK unilaterally revoke Article 50, thereby giving up on Brexit, if a second referendum calls for that. And if the UK does come to its senses, then the EU should forgive and forget this whole mess, letting Britain stay in the EU on its old terms. Otherwise it risks the worst possible outcome – a no-deal Brexit that hurts everybody. Eddie Lampert sure this lipstick will make pig kissable By all rights, Sears Holding should be pushing up daisies in the retail graveyard by now, but Eddie Lampert keeps throwing good money after it. Now he has made a $4.6 billion bid to buy it out of bankruptcy and keep a husk of it running. This is admirable, sort of, but  Sarah Halzack notes Lampert keeps stubbornly not doing the one thing needed to actually turn Sears and Kmart around: make them into retailers that don’t feel like prison commissaries. Seriously, have you been in one lately? Opec kicks can, self Crude-oil prices fell hard again today, and Opec was widely expected to leave a meeting in Vienna with a pledge to pump more oil to support the market. That didn’t happen. Liam Denning writes this puts even more pressure on Opec to come up with such a pledge after tomorrow’s meeting of the organisation and some non-Opec exporters such as Russia. Otherwise Opec might soon be exposed as the dysfunctional, barely held-together herd of cats it really is. At the G-20 meeting last weekend, it briefly looked as if Russia and Saudi Arabia had agreed to pump more oil, in defiance of their mutual admirer Trump. They may yet do so tomorrow; but that’s no sure thing. And an agreement might not be worth the paper it’s written on, writes Leonid Bershidsky. Both countries have every reason to pump as much oil as they can. Telltale charts Government subsidies accelerated the evolution of solar-panel technology, making it more economical, notes Noah Smith. Trump’s plan to kill electric-vehicle subsidies would prevent a similar evolution of battery technology that could help the world avoid climate catastrophe.  © 2018 Bloomberg L.P