The ‘Group of 20’ – finance ministers and central bank governors of 19 countries and the European Union – represents 85% of global GDP, 80% global investments, 75% of international trade, and 66% of the world population. Its objectives are to develop global policies to address today’s most pressing challenges. In 2008, for example, the G20 was seen to be influential in stabilising the world economy. Pretty powerful stuff. This year’s summit, however, was overshadowed by ‘bigger’ issues – from Brexit and the Russia-Ukraine incident (Russian border guards fired on and seized three Ukrainian vessels days before the summit), to the US-China trade war, and tensions between Turkey and Saudi Arabia arising from the macabre incident in which journalist Jamal Khashoggi was murdered. Blunders Then there were the diplomatic gaffes, the most notable being French president Emmanuel Macron having to shake the hands of ground staff as no one had pitched up to meet him at the airport, and the ceremonial band launching into the welcome intended for president Xi Jinping of China when an advisor was the first to step off the plane. While such matters grab headlines, the main focus of the 2018 summit was fair and sustainable development. Ministerial meetings had been held during the year to discuss global developments in health, excess steel capacity, education and employment, the digital economy, agriculture, finance and energy. Each of these meetings culminates in a ministerial declaration setting out detailed proposals and commitments. However, it still took one-and-a-half days of difficult negotiations before the world leaders managed to agree on a joint statement, no doubt after much coercion behind the scenes. The lengthy statement, which promotes “dialogue and the reach for common ground”, contains references to various roadmaps, special initiatives and policy statements. It reads like a Christmas (or equivalent) wish list. Promised resistance A notable failure of the summit was its promised resistance to trade protectionism. This was omitted from the joint statement at the insistence of the US. In previous years, protectionism featured high on the agenda. Its omission removes the level playing field and has dire consequences for the future of world trade. US president Donald Trump and China’s Xi had a meeting and agreed on a truce, the details of which are not available. China is the largest consumer of commodities, and any fallout between the two countries will have severe consequences. Many more topics were discussed and debated, including the future of work, infrastructure for development, a sustainable food future and a strategy for gender-mainstreaming. Overall the G20 reaffirmed its pledge to strive towards balanced, sustainable and inclusive growth; to a monetary policy that will support economic activity and price stability; and to ‘improving’ a rules-based international order. The pie-in-the-sky dreams include transformative technologies that are “expected to bring immense economic opportunities … new and better jobs, and higher living standards”. A developed digital economy is essential for sustainable development, and must be affordable, accessible, and secure. It cannot get off the ground without basic digital infrastructure. ‘To be discussed in 2020’ The leaders said they support an open and resilient financial system and will continue to work towards a “globally fair, sustainable and modern international tax system” … but the hoped-for solution to the tax implications of the digital economy has now been moved to the agenda for 2020. Promises were made to take action to eradicate child labour, forced labour, human trafficking, modern slavery and gender equality; to promote equal access to education and digitalisation; and to attract private capital to invest in infrastructure development. Further weighty topics included world health, hunger, food security, extreme weather patterns and waste. Climate change – a global challenge needing to be addressed urgently – did not fare well. It was another notable omission from the joint statement. And the US reiterated its decision to withdraw from the Paris Agreement on climate change. ‘No solution’ issues The refugee crisis is one of many issues for which no solution was presented, other than “shared actions to address the root causes of displacement”. Others include illicit financial flows, corruption and economic crimes, energy (security, sustainability, resilience, efficiency, affordability and stability), world debt, the debt vulnerabilities of low-income countries, terrorism, terrorist financing and money laundering. Continuity of the G20’s agenda rests on the ‘troika’ – the country currently holding the G20 presidency (Argentina), the country that held it the previous year (Germany) and the next country to hold the presidency (Japan). Japan will host the meeting next year, followed by Saudi Arabia in 2020. Holding the presidency can allow a country to influence the focus of the summit. This year Argentina hoped to bring a Latin American perspective to the G20, to “harness the region’s great economic potential and advance towards eradicating poverty”. It probably failed in this regard. Having the leaders of the world’s major economies convene to discuss global events is noteworthy. What will be achieved from this year’s gathering, however, is yet to be seen.