UK Prime Minister Theresa May is calling off a crucial vote in Parliament on whether to approve her Brexit deal, according to a person familiar with the situation. The vote in the House of Commons to endorse the terms of the UK’s split from the European Union was due to be held on Tuesday evening but is now set to be rescheduled, according to the person who declined to be named. It’s still possible that May’s Cabinet will take a different view and push the prime minister to carry on and call the vote as planned for Tuesday evening. She is now holding talks with her top ministers to finalise the government’s position. May’s office publicly insisted it was going ahead as recently as 11:20 am on Monday in London but the prospect of an overwhelming revolt from members of Parliament forced the premier to think again. May is speaking by phone to her most senior ministers from 11:30 am and the government is expected to make a formal announcement on the way forward to Parliament later in the day. May’s plan to delay the vote throws the Brexit process into further turmoil. She is due back in Brussels at a summit of EU on Thursday and is expected to ask for fresh concessions in an attempt to revive the chances of getting her deal through Parliament. May spent the weekend talking to fellow EU leaders to update them on her struggle and to explore possible changes to make the agreement more palatable. But the EU has said it won’t reopen negotiations. The stakes for May are high. If Parliament refuses to ratify the withdrawal agreement, the UK will be on course to leave the EU without a deal, unleashing political and economic chaos. May herself could be forced from office and the UK might need a fresh election or a new referendum to resolve the crisis. Delaying the vote is likely only to provide a temporary reprieve for the premier as she has promised to give Parliament a decisive say on whether to accept or reject the agreement before the UK leaves the bloc on March 29. “Pulling the ‘deal’ vote would just delay the inevitable,” Tory MP Philip Lee tweeted. “Brussels will not grant any further significant concessions.”