Markets have become increasingly volatile on the back of risks around late-cycle global growth and the concomitant possibility of a US or even global recession, the ongoing chance of a full-scale trade war, and uncertainty around the US rate cycle will continue into 2019. Global outlook Global growth has indeed been far more unsynchronised and unbalanced during 2018 – compared to 2016 and 2017 – with the US experiencing strong growth while European Union countries, China and other emerging economies have been showing signs of slowing. This led to a strong US dollar in 2018. Looking forward to 2019, it is important to note that late-cycle global growth does not automatically mean recession. We expect a growth rotation away from the US, meaning somewhat slower growth in the US economy versus slightly better growth in the eurozone, China and other emerging markets. While overall global growth will slow through the year and into 2020, it will likely be better balanced and more synchronised once again, and thus more healthy than during the unbalanced 2018. US interest rates Further, the end of the US rate hiking cycle is in sight. This does not mean it has ended, but there is now more visibility regarding the end of the hiking cycle. Not only will the US economy likely grow at a slower pace during 2019 – interest rate sensitive sectors such as housing have already showed clear signs of slowing – but the underlying pace of consumer inflation has started slowing recently. The strong dollar and lower commodity prices will likely outweigh the inflation impact of higher trade tariffs on inflation. Dollar outlook Increasingly more frequent comments from US Federal Reserve officials – including the chairman – have highlighted the fact that they are considering the impact of not only slower US growth, but also slower and unbalanced global growth, as well as the level of US policy interest rates and the fact that they might need to signal more data dependency in their policy meeting statements. We expect the Fed to ease off from its pace of four rate hikes during 2018 to only two in 2019. The outcome of more balanced global growth and a tamer Fed is likely to be a weaker dollar during 2019. The dollar could reach a range of 1.25 to 1.30 per euro by the end of 2019 from a level of 1.14 at the time of writing. While the lower oil price and the 90-day trade truce between the US and China will help, these issues remain risks for the global economy and warrant a close watch. Receding global headwinds, lower oil prices, a weaker dollar, a stable China and a better policy mix presents a better overall environment for emerging economies. Local confidence outlook While we all agree that progress toward a better growth outlook for South Africa has been painfully slow, some progress has been made with respect to certain cabinet changes, new boards at state-owned enterprises, commissions of enquiry into state capture and the South African Revenue Service (Sars), finalisation of the mining charter, a new head of the national prosecuting authority and the president’s investment plan. While many risks remain and decisive policy adjustments are delayed until after the 2019 elections, these changes should have helped to at least stabilise confidence among businesses, consumers and investors. SA growth outlook While economic growth remains weak even after the swing out of recession with 2.2% annualised growth in the third quarter, we expect the slow cyclical uptick in the economy to remain on track and expect better growth during 2019. From 2017’s 1.3% growth, we expect a rather dismal growth rate of 0.9% in 2018, rising to 2% in 2019. While there are certainly downside growth risks – think weak confidence and electricity shortfall – a decent global environment, low local inflation, post-election sentiment improvement and pent up investment demand could help elevate the cyclical growth rebound. SA interest rates The November interest rate increase by the South African Reserve Bank (Sarb) was a close call, reflecting to a large extent the view in the market. With weak growth, very weak pricing power by businesses and recent cost increases, the environment is very deflationary. Measured inflation continually surprised on the downside during 2019 as very little of the rand’s effect was passed on to consumer prices. Similarly, the petrol price increases from April to October have limited consumer discretionary spending, further exacerbating the deflationary environment. Clearly the Sarb was conducting a risk-containing exercise, worried about a global slowdown, US rate cycle and the potential impact on the rand. As highlighted above, most of these risks could turn out the other way. Deflationary environment I expect this deflationary environment to continue in 2019, with the better growth only impacting price pressures more decisively in 2020. Apart from the deflationary environment, the sharp petrol price decline in December and another large decrease at around 50 cents per litre decline expected in January 2019 will pull down the 2019 inflation average markedly. With food price inflation also expected to perform relatively modestly during next year, I now expect inflation to average 4.8% in 2019 – compared to the Reserve Bank’s forecast of 5.5%. This in my mind leaves little room for further rate increases and I therefore expect the Sarb to pause for an extended period. The rand outlook The better balanced global outlook that is expected and the weaker dollar, combined with a confidence boost in South Africa should policy reform return in earnest after a likely good ANC election outcome, should lead to a sharply stronger rand exchange rate during 2019. An exchange rate close to or around R12 (or even stronger) per US dollar would not be surprising. Although this strength will likely be short term, I do expect a positive SA scenario to lead to a more stable exchange rate over the next few years. However, the rand will in all likelihood maintain a weakening path on a medium to long-term basis due to inflation differentials. Now is not the time to invest everything offshore From an investment perspective it is important to note that this slower world and better SA outlook means that SA assets should outperform global assets and thus it would be rather dangerous to take all your money offshore. In a diversified balanced fund this scenario should mean overweight SA assets and underweight offshore assets. Johann Els is chief economist at Old Mutual Investment Group.