With a R3.5 billion loss under its belt and a share price that has lost a quarter of its value over the last five years, it is not surprising that analysts’ consensus for Woolworths Holdings is a sell. At a P/E of 16, it is difficult to argue that the share offers much value at its current level of R56. Much of Woolworths’ misfortune has to do with its David Jones operation in Australia – where a R7 billion impairment threw the group into a bottom-line loss – and the poor performance of its local clothing division, which some analysts feel it has been slow to fix. However, there are some signs of investor interest. Terence Craig, director and chief investment officer at Element Investment Managers, says that while Element does not own Woolworths yet, “we are looking at it”. He points out that top-rated analysts were calling it a buy in February 2016 at R102, and again in February 2017, when it was trading at R84. By the time it got to R64 in June 2017, analysts were calling it a sell, and again in August 2018 at R52. If investors followed this advise they would have lost money. Craig said that often prices disconnect with value because of short-term interest and sell-side analysts being forced to make a call on a 12-month view. “Our view is that while it is better priced, prospects for retailers are still poor.” He also pointed to Australia, saying it still had “a lot of hard yards getting its flagship store right”. Woolworths had been a bit gung-ho in Australia, he said. Management has tended to say they got the market cycle wrong, “but if it is a top retailer, why did it spend so much if it didn’t know?”, he said. “R7 billion is a lot to write off – it is not as bad as 100%, but it is a concern, and it was done under [Ian] Moir’s watch as CEO.” Craig did, however, feel that it had done well in South Africa. Whether it can keep up with competitors who are improving, and whether it can keep food going better than it already has, is debatable, he said, adding that it still needs to turn clothing around. “It is not cheap enough to invest, but it looks interesting. Any share that has dropped 50% from its high will come into our radar, but there are others, so Woolworths is not alone.” Woolworths’ trading update for the 20 weeks to November 11 showed initial signs of improvement since its disastrous year-end. Group sales grew 2.7% year-on-year, but fashion, beauty, and home sales remain an issue – declining 3.3%, with price increases of 4%. Comparable store sales were 3.9% lower, with net retail space growth of 0.5%. Sales of womenswear, where it has struggled, showed “a positive trend” while food sales grew 7.2%, with volumes driven by 1% price increases. David Jones sales increased by 2.9%, with online sales growing by 48.4% and contributing 5.2% of sales. Country Road Group sales grew 3.4%, with online sales growing 25% and representing 20% of sales. At the group’s annual general meeting on Friday, Moir defended the group against criticism that it was not up to par with other supermarket groups, saying that Woolworths has gained market share and made a higher return than competitors over the past five years. The problems are not in food, he said, but fashion, where the group has changed people, structure, and process, and is “already seeing positive effects of changes we have made”. In clothing, it was moving back to stocking key items of quality basics that are absolutely available. What the board was not able to confirm, was whether there would be any more write-offs at David Jones. Hubert Brody, who will take over the chairmanship from Simon Sussman in a year’s time, told shareholders that “the last impairment is recent and we have to see how things play out,” adding that he could not say with any certainty whether there would be further impairments. A Woolworths Holdings spokesperson told Moneyweb that the “significant period of transformation and investment” in Australia was required “and always part of our strategy following acquisition”, although coming during a weak Australian market which caused some headwinds. “The bulk of the heavy lifting has now been done: new systems and processes are in place, a new operating platform is in place, the new online platform has been launched and is trading well; the offering has been refined with many new brands and better service; the Elizabeth Street flagship refurbishment is well underway; head office has been successfully relocated and a new and fresh team is in place.” The spokesperson said that trading conditions have been difficult in the South African and Australian markets, and the business transformation in David Jones “has caused considerable disruption”.  The group also “executed poorly” in some key areas of Woolworths and Country Road women’s ranges. The spokesperson said David Jones’s trading has improved significantly over the last nine months due to a number of initiatives including the introduction of new merchandise and online systems. Management was also confident Country Road would return to growth under a new brand vision and product direction undertaken by a new management team. “A clear focus for us is our digital capability, both in Australia where online is growing at 45% in David Jones and over 20% in Country Road [off a base of 18% of sales], and in South Africa where fashion has seen a 77% growth in sales, albeit off a very low base.” The food business continues to outperform the market, with sales up 7.2% in the first 20 weeks. “We have now outperformed the market consistently for over eight years and are focused on maintaining our leadership position, working closely with strategic suppliers to continue to offer the quality, value, innovation and in-store experience that differentiate us from other food retailers. Commenting on the competitive landscape, the spokesperson said some of the new international entrants have found the local market far tougher than they thought, and have either left or pulled back on original plans. Craig said he still has concerns. “When something looks cheap, the concern is it may stay cheap for a while and there may be better opportunities.” With Woolworths in particular, there are still concerns over how long it takes it to correct its mistakes, and whether it has the right management in place to make these corrections.