Here’s what caught our attention on Thursday: 1. IMF boss not here for negotiations Christine Lagarde, the managing director of the IMF confirmed on Wednesday that she had not received any request to offer financial support to South Africa, which is currently tackling a number of debt issues. Lagarde met with Sarb governor, Lesetja Kganyago to discuss recent economic developments in South Africa. Lagarde also highlighted the significance of protecting key institutions, such as Treasury, the Reserve Bank and having a sound monetary policy. Read: IMF boss Lagarde urges SA to shield key institutions IMF’s Lagarde says SA has not requested financial support IMF questions SA’s spending priorities 2. Nova on the verge of insolvency A Moneyweb investigation into the Nova Property Group reveals how the company may be on the verge of insolvency. The company’s financial results show that its operating loss amounted to R36 million and the net loss amounted to R155 million for the year ending February 2018. Moneyweb is also reporting that despite the dire financial state of the company significant bonuses were granted to board members. Read: Nova teetering on the verge of insolvency 3. Nersa ends solar registrations, stifling growth The national energy regulator, Nersa’s failure to register small-scale solar photovoltaic installations in Eskom electricity distribution areas is stifling the productivity of farmers and the development of the industry. Moneyweb is reporting that Nersa stopped registrations in February in order to develop an alternative registration process, which once gets sorted out can help the industry grow exponentially. Read: Electricity generation by farmers for farmers? ‘No’ says state 4. Brian Dames quits Eskom task team Brian Dames stepped down from the Eskom task Ttam five days after being appointed by President Cyril Ramaphosa. On Wednesday, Bloomberg reported that Dames said there is a perceived conflict of interest relating to the scope of work and terms of reference of the task team. 5. Rand update The events developing in the US are having a direct impact on emerging markets. For one, the rand gained slightly on Wednesday following the Fed’s rating decision, which is putting pressure on the dollar. At 9:12 on Thursday, the rand was at R14.29 to the dollar.