Commodity investors face a tumultuous week after two major decisions by leaders at the G-20 in Argentina, while up north, Canada’s largest oil-producing province just ordered significant supply curbs. In Buenos Aires, there was a 90-day truce in the US-China trade fight, and separately Russia and Saudi Arabia struck a deal to extend into 2019 their deal to manage the oil market. Beyond that, Alberta will chop a third of a million of barrels a day. While the G-20 outcomes and oil’s rally are the top items on the agenda, they aren’t the only ones. It’s a big week for iron ore as Vale SA briefs investors on the market and separately, Singapore Exchange started trade in a contract for high-grade material. In Europe and the US, the future of agriculture is up for discussion, while in Poland there’s a critical climate conference. And lastly, we’ll get an update on what Elon Musk’s Tesla has been up to Down Under. US President Donald Trump has plenty of form when it comes to talking up his own achievements, and “amazing and productive” was his view of the weekend dinner with his Chinese counterpart Xi Jinping. At the gathering on the sidelines of the G-20 in Argentina, the two sides agreed to put their bruising trade war on hold for 90-days, with the mainland lining up to boost purchases of farm, industrial and energy products. There’ll also be more talks on thorny issues including forced technology transfers and intellectual property protection.  The step forward will be significant for raw materials, especially soybeans, with the White House saying that China will start buying US agricultural products “immediately.” But after the initial euphoria wears off, there may well be a reassessment. “The jury is out on whether these short-term wins will convert to longer-term gains,” Mohamed A. El-Erian said. And Goldman Sachs Group noted the rapprochement doesn’t solve all trade problems. With Brent’s collapse in November to concentrate their minds, Russia and Saudi Arabia agreed at the G-20 to extend their deal to manage the market, known as OPEC+. That opens the door for a deal at this week’s OPEC meeting in Vienna, although plenty of work remains, including how much to cut. As markets reopened on Monday, crude soared, with the jump aided by one of Canada’s provinces, Alberta, doing for oil what another, Quebec, does for maple syrup. “There is no final decision on volumes, but together with Saudi Arabia we will do it,” Russian President Vladimir Putin said. Getting to an agreement will not be easy, however, as commentator Julian Lee points out: while Saudi Arabia is adamant the burden of a cut must be shared, others in the group argue the kingdom’s output boost since June has created the problem, and it’s now up to the kingdom to solve it by bearing the brunt. It’ll be a tough session in Vienna.  It’ll be an important week for iron ore, which got beaten up in November. Brazilian giant Vale will meet investors in New York on Tuesday and in London on Thursday to discuss expansion plans and its outlook for demand. The largest producer of the raw material used in steelmaking has benefited as Chinese mills boost purchases of higher-grade ore that contains less impurities. Aside from the miner’s take, investors will also track developments in Asia where Singapore Exchange Ltd. will on Monday introduce a much-anticipated futures contract that’ll allow bets on high-grade material — just the kind that Vale supplies. China’s moves to battle pollution have spurred rising demand for top-quality ore over the past two years, widening spreads between grades.  For better or worse, Elon Musk doesn’t do low key. The headline-grabbing entrepreneur famously won a bet with fellow tech billionaire Mike Cannon-Brookes that Tesla could install a 100-megawatt storage facility within 100 days Down Under to help support the South Australia’s blackout-plagued grid. Following that wager win, it’s now time for an update on operations at the plant that was touted then as the world’s biggest lithium-ion battery. While it may be hard for outsiders to grasp quite why Australia — laden with coal, blanketed by sunshine, and blessed with extraordinary troves of gas offshore — can’t manage to keep the lights on, Musk’s offering, owned by French company Neoen SA, helps to highlight the future as new forms of power and technology come to the fore. The briefing comes on Wednesday, and while Musk himself won’t be on hand, executives will provide their latest thoughts. What could be more important than where our next meal is coming from at a time of trade-war disruption, climate change and new technology? All that, as well as immediate reaction to the outcome at the G-20, will be scrutinized at two major conferences. In Brussels on Thursday, Phil Hogan, the European Commissioner for Agriculture and Rural Development, will feature in the opening session of the 2018 EU Agricultural Outlook Conference. The event will examine issues from blockchain to biofuels, with input from commentators including supermarket operator Carrefour SA and food giant Nestle SA. Before that in Chicago, US Agriculture Secretary Sonny Perdue and industry experts including farmers and analysts will convene at DTN’s 2018 Ag Summit. Perdue is expected to discuss prospects for global trade and the economic outlook as it relates to agriculture. With US soybeans rallying on Monday after the trade truce struck on the sidelines of the G-20, he’ll also offer perspective on how significant that initial agreement will prove in the long term.  Few things affect commodities as much as global warming and efforts to stem it: old energy including coal is tagged for causing the problem, while new forms of power may help fix it; foodstuffs are in the firing line as temperatures rise; and metals such as copper and nickel feature in new battery technology. So investors will be tracking a mammoth United Nations climate conference this week and next in the Polish city of Katowice. The meeting, known as COP24 in UN jargon, will seek to transform pledges made in Paris three years ago into an international rulebook aimed at curbing greenhouse gas emissions. The first week begins with world leaders arriving for a summit hosted by Polish President Andrzej Duda on Monday. Energy and finance ministers are expected to show up starting December 10 to turn progress into decisions, and by the weekend of December 14, if talks go smoothly, the Katowice Rulebook will be adopted. The outlook is turning positive in the soybean market, with bulls outnumbering bears by the most since July, according to a Bloomberg survey. Sentiment shifted on optimism the leaders of the world’s two biggest economies would call a trade truce during their meeting at the weekend. That shift that looks set to pay off given developments at the gathering, with China agreeing to start purchasing agricultural products from US farmers immediately. In the gold market, traders are bullish for a third week as dovish comments from the Federal Reserve on the outlook for interest rates bolster the appeal of the non-interest bearing metal. Respondents were also bullish on sugar, while sentiment was mixed for crude oil and natural gas. Terminal subscribers can see the other commodity surveys here.