The economic situation in South Africa means that it is somewhat difficult for students to attain decent employment after their studies. However, due to a scholarship initiative, some will have a helping hand. In an aim to lessen the strain for many students who are unable to afford a tertiary education, Pearson Institute of Higher Education (PIHE) has launched an initiative that offers 200 scholarships worth over R10 million. According to recent statistics, the unemployment rate has risen to 27.5% in the third quarter this year from 27% previously recorded statistics. Loosely translated, there are now around 6.2 million unemployed South African citizens, making it even more difficult for those leaving matric with little to no experience to enter the job market. “In the current economic climate a good basic education is simply not enough to secure a well-paying job.  Even though a degree does not guarantee a job, it will give applicants a better chance of securing that job over those who just have a matric,” says Dr Nhlanhla Thwala, academic director of the Pearson Institute. Initiatives such as the PIHE scholarship provide a greater portion of school leavers with a tertiary education. The socio and economic challenges in South Africa results in many high performing, passionate young people not receiving the opportunities they deserve. Thus, PIHE attempts to assist in this regard, and this particular initiative plays an important role, he continues. This initiative funds studies in any of the foundation’s courses on offer (including Higher Certificates and Pre-degree Foundation Programmes) to grade 12 learners with an admission to bachelor degrees, diplomas and higher certificates. “Our wide range of scholarship options means that applicants now have a means to be exposed to a higher education that was previously never available to them,” continues Thwala. “The number of bursaries on offer is limited to 200, so those interested need to be motivated and serious about their chances at a brighter future.” Application details and requirements can be found here: https://www.pearsoninstitute.ac.za.