An apparent implosion in cryptocurrency prices early this year and on-going price volatility have done little to deter South African traders, investors and enthusiasts alike. Bitcoin, the largest cryptocurrency by market share, surged more than 900% last year to peak just below $20 000 in December only to fall drastically in the new year. In January alone, the cryptocurrency’s market capitalisation fell by more than $44 billion amid concerns over new regulations in South Korea, a proposed ban on trading in India, an investigation into a US exchange and a Facebook ban on digital currency adverts. Cryptocompare shows rand activity in the bitcoin market spiked amid uncertainty with a more than R6 billion – a record high monthly volume – being traded in January. Local exchange Luno, which according to Cryptocompare, facilitates some 97% of rand-denominated trades, recorded one of the highest trading volumes in the rand-bitcoin pair during the period. The exchange would not reveal the value of rand deposits or withdrawals over the period but it appears not all trades saw bitcoin holders taking their money (or what was left of it) and running. “Generally speaking, whenever there’s a big upswing in prices — as we saw in November and December — there is a big increase in customer deposits. That said, the data doesn’t show that rand withdrawals increase by the same amount during downturns — as happened over the past few weeks,” said Werner van Rooyen, head of marketing and growth at Luno. He said the exchange reached out to customers when it seemed the price would “only ever go up” to warn them of the dangers of runaway markets. And although there is likely to have been euphoric buying and panic selling during the drastic swings, he said most bitcoin holders are used to price volatility. Lorien Gamaroff, chief executive of Bankymoon, said much of the volatility is a result of regulatory uncertainty and shallow market dynamics. “Cryptocurrencies exist in a regulatory grey zone and so sentiment is easily changed when confronted with both positive and negative news. The market caps of these currencies are relatively small and so low amounts of selling and buying result in large movements in price.” “This accentuates the panic selling and euphoric buying, which contributes to the epic volatility that typifies these markets.” According to Farzam Ehsani, of the FOUNDeRY, price volatility is here to stay. “Volatility is an indispensable part of the price discovery process of this new asset class. We have no valuation metrics, no discounted cash flows, no comparisons. All we have is the raw clash of supply and demand. We should expect this type of volatility to continue for a lot longer as this asset class matures.” A new report by S&P Global Ratings states cryptocurrencies, in their current version, have characteristics of a traditional bubble. According to its analysts, retail investors would be the first to bear the brunt of a collapse in the market value of cryptocurrencies as rated banks’ exposure – direct or indirect – to the market remains limited. Institutional investors now have access to the market through bitcoin futures, launched last year. “For now, a meaningful drop in cryptocurrencies’ market value would be just a ripple across the financial services industry, still too small to disturb stability or affect the creditworthiness of banks we rate,” wrote Dr Mohamed Damak, financial institutions sector lead at S&P. The ratings agency does not view cryptocurrencies as an asset class but said that if currencies were to become an asset class, the impact on financial services firms would be more gradual. Cryptocurrency prices, including that of bitcoin, have ticked up from their January lows. This writer has holdings in cryptocurrencies.