A group of around 200 brokers is in the process of instituting legal action against the board members of Nova Property Group, its auditors BDO and other stakeholders. Moneyweb has been aware of the pending legal action by the group, who previously sold Sharemax syndication products to clients. The group announced the intention to take legal action shortly after the Pretoria High Court’s recent dismissal of activist Deon Pienaar’s application to have the Reserve Bank’s decision, that Sharemax contravened the Banks Act, reviewed. Pienaar’s application, which was made without legal representation, was dismissed with costs. Read: Did Sharemax contravene the Banks Act? Activist applies for interdict to stop proposed Nova listing Brokers played an integral part in the Sharemax scheme and around 6 000 of them sold more than 33 000 syndications to around 18 000 investors. Following the Reserve Bank’s decision that Sharemax contravened the Bank’s Act, thousands of investors lodged complaints with the FAIS ombudsman against the brokers. If legal action continues, it will be the first collective action by the brokers since the Sharemax collapse in 2009. In the e-mail, Jan Labuschagne, of JL Brokers, says on behalf of the group that although Pienaar lost his case, “all is not lost”. “Deon refused our offer of legal assistance and we believe this was the reason for his loss.” He says the pending legal action will focus on numerous alleged contraventions by the board of the Companies Act, which cost investors dearly. Other aspects the brokers aim to focus on include: ·      The board continuing to pay itself millions in bonuses, while investors received virtually no income from their property investments, despite contraventions to the Companies Act; ·      The outflow of “consultation fees” amounting to R3 million to the private company of Connie Myburgh, the chairman of the Nova board; ·      The purchase of expensive vehicles for consultants and other management companies; ·      Rent income that wasn’t collected; ·      The overvaluation of properties by the Nova board. Read: Is the Sharemax landmark worth R1.6bn or R616m? Labuschagne said to Moneyweb that the group wants the historic Sharemax properties to be returned to investors, who were the original owners of the properties. “We also want the rental income to flow to investors and give investors, as shareholders, the authority to decide what needs to happen with the properties.” He added that the group is also investigating criminal charges against the directors of Nova. “We do not see much difference in the conduct of the Steinhoff directors and Nova’ directors. We need to follow through on this case, not only for the sake of investors, but also the business future of South Africa.” This case follows numerous Moneyweb exposés in recent years, which revealed that the Nova board received nearly 90% of the issued shares in the Nova Group without paying a cent. This allowed the board to pay themselves absolutely exorbitant salaries. The composition of the Nova board’s audit committee was not in accordance with the Companies Act, while the company was also forced to write down nearly R1.4 billion following the overvaluation of The Villa and Zambezi properties.  Nova did not respond to e-mailed questions. The action group can be contacted per e-mail at sharemaxlegal@gmail.com. Related: Part 1: Déjà vu for former Sharemax investors Part 2: Many questions surround proposed Nova listing