South Africa’s new President Cyril Ramaphosa has used his maiden State of the Nation Address (Sona) to outline his key priorities for fighting corruption, creating jobs, and restoring growth to the economy. Facing an unemployment rate that stubbornly sits at more than 26%, an economy expected to grow by 1.2% in 2018 and rampant corruption in the public and private sector, Ramaphosa said a “new dawn” is imminent in turning South Africa’s fortunes. “We should put behind us the era of diminishing trust in public institutions and weakened confidence in leaders. We should put all the negativity that has dogged our country behind us because a new dawn is upon us.” Ramaphosa, 65, was delivering his maiden Sona following his swearing in as South Africa’s president on Wednesday, replacing Jacob Zuma. On Tuesday, Zuma has resigned with immediate effect after being recalled by the ANC National Executive Committee, ending a more than eight-year rein that has been rocked by corruption scandals. Ramaphosa has warned that turning South Africa’s fortunes around will require tough decisions and setting the country on a new path. This includes collaboration with business and labour to restore investor confidence, creating jobs and preventing further sovereign rating downgrades by credit rating agencies. Unlike his predecessor’s, the Ramaphosa presidency appears to welcome collaboration between government and business. Economic growth Ramaphosa has targeted industrialisation, manufacturing and infrastructure investments as drivers of economic growth, stabilisation of government debt and restoring the health of state-owned enterprises (SOEs). The focus on infrastructure investments – including rolling out new roads, power stations and schools –  is not necessarily new as the adopted National Development Plan (NDP) aims to use infrastructure investments to grow South Africa’s economy by more than 5%, create jobs and reducing inequality.  However, the implementation of the NDP has been slow. Ramaphosa has recognised this problem. “As some of our projects are taking time to get off the ground and to enhance our efforts, I will assemble a team to speed up implementation of new projects, particularly water projects, health facilities and road maintenance.” The manufacturing industry will also be targeted. “We are going to promote greater investment in key manufacturing sectors through the strategic use of incentives and other measures,” he said. “To further stimulate manufacturing, we will forge ahead with the localisation programme, through which products like textile, clothing, furniture, rail rolling stock and water meters are designated for local procurement.” The mining sector has also been targeted as a growth vector. In South Africa’s efforts to take advantage of a recovery in commodity prices, the government plans to work with mining companies, unions and communities to stabilise the sector. This includes using the controversial Mining Charter and processing the long-awaited Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development Act Amendment Bill to racially transform the sector and promoting new players in the sector. Employment Ramaphosa used his speech to outline measures to promote youth employment. In March, the government plans to launch a Youth Employment Service initiative, which will place unemployed youth in paid internships in companies across the economy. “Together with our partners in business, we have agreed to create a million such internships in the next three years.” He cited partnerships with the private sector and investing in small businesses to drive employment in key sectors of the economy. In practice, this will see the government investing in small business incubations, finalising a small business and innovation fund targeted at start-ups and reducing the regulatory barriers for small businesses. Corruption Zuma’s presidency has been marred by corruption scandals, which have not only implicated his family but also SOEs including Eskom, Transnet and the South African Airways. Widespread corruption has even placed the financial position of SOEs in jeopardy, which also has implications for the country’s economic growth. “This is the year in which we will turn the tide of corruption in our public institutions. The criminal justice institutions have been taking initiatives that will enable us to deal effectively with corruption.” These initiatives include the start of the commission of inquiry into state capture, which will be headed by the Deputy Chief Justice Judge Raymond Zondo. “The commission should not displace the regular work of the country’s law enforcement agencies in investigating and prosecuting any and all acts of corruption.” Ramaphosa said the government will “urgently attend” to the leadership issues at the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) in order to stabilise the institution, which has been marred by political interference under the Zuma presidency. The government will also take steps to stabilise and strengthen the South African Revenue Service.