I will have R7.2 million in a pension fund when I retire in April 2019 at 60 years old. I need advise on how to invest these funds so as to realise an income of R38 000 per month please?  In attempting to answer the readers’ question, it is imperative to take cognisance of the fact that the answer below is not construed as advice. Post retirement planning in my opinion is one of the most important planning events that the reader will engage in, and I would encourage and urge this reader to engage with an experienced and skilled certified financial planner®, who will be in a position to coach and guide them through the process. There are factors to consider when determining how and where to invest funds, which are unknown at present, but need to be considered and inevitably have enabled the brevity of the answer below:  The member has the option of either a ‘conventional annuity’ or a ‘living annuity’. A living annuity is also commonly referred to as a linked life annuity, or an “Illa”. A living annuity is a compulsory annuity, in respect of which the annuitant (the member) has the option to draw an income as follows:  The reader has indicated that they wish to draw an income of R38 000 per month; I am not sure if this is nett income or gross. If it is gross income, they will be required to pay tax on the income. I am unaware of the reader’s tax rate. The income equates to approximately 6.5% of their capital. I have included the table below, to illustrate the effect of income drawdown, investment return and the effects of these in years on the income you draw: Years before your income will start to reduce Income Drawdown Annual investment return before inflation, but after all fees  2.5% 5% 7.5% 10% 12.5% 2.5% 21 30 50+ 50+ 50+ 5% 11 14 19 33 50+ 7.5% 6 8 10 13 22 10% 4 5 6 7 9 12.5% 2 3 3 4 5 15% 1 1 2 2 2 17.5% 1 1 1 1 1 Source: Asisa “It is important to note that the table above assumes that the income drawdown rate is adjusted over time to maintain a real income by allowing for inflation of 6% a year. Once the number of years in the table above has been reached, the pensioner’s income will diminish rapidly in the subsequent years,” states the Association For Savings and Investment SA (Asisa). An analysis of the readers’ risk tolerance, and risk profile will assist in determining the investment strategy. The investment strategy will guide the financial planner as to the funds to select and use within the investment. Together, the planner and reader need to assess his/her tolerance to risk, the risks associated to meet their required return in order to provide the income, increasing with inflation for the term required. In terms of the income the reader wishes to drawdown, R38 000, it is important to structure the annuity in such a way, that the income drawdown percentage portion of the annuity does not exceed the actual portfolio return. If this is the case, the capital will be eroded. The consistent performance and underlying composition of these funds are important factors to take into consideration. 