South Africans should still consider retirement annuities (RAs) as a mechanism to neutralise the impact of taxes on their post-retirement financial goals despite the fact that there was no significant increase in personal income taxes in the 2018 budget speech. Finance minister Malusi Gigaba left the marginal tax rate at 45% for individuals earning more than R1.5 million a year. Instead, National Treasury plans to raise R6.8 billion from the personal tax system by limiting inflation relief for personal tax rebates. The lowest three personal income tax brackets and the primary, secondary and tertiary rebates will be partially adjusted for inflation via a 3.1% increase, while the top four brackets remain unchanged for the fiscal year commencing March 1 2018. Read: Income tax: This is what you’ll pay RAs are a tax-efficient savings vehicle to ensure that you stay on track with your long-term financial planning goals, which are in all likelihood going to extend beyond daily living expenses and medical needs. Most people don’t realise that RAs are not only for retirement purposes – they are a tax efficient way of building up funds to finance your long-term future. Given the fact that South African taxpayers are generally allowed to place as much as 27.5% of their earnings in retirement savings vehicles, and receive the full amount as a tax deduction, albeit in the current year or the following years of assessment, it makes senses to utilise this full tax-free allocation.  Taxpayers may even include any capital gains that they are liable for in a particular year of assessment as part of the 27.5% tax deduction. Most people in South Africa don’t even save at all, let alone use the full 27.5% tax free retirement allocation. By using your full 27.5% allocation you are able to neutralise the impact of taxes on your savings and at the same time make a meaningful contribution to your post-retirement financial future. Current estimates indicate that only between 3% and 6% of South Africans can afford to retire, thanks to the country’s pitifully-low savings rate. The so-called “sandwich generation” will be under particular pressure as this cohort of the population – who are typically within ten years of retirement – are responsible for supporting their own children whilst also caring for their ageing parents. According to some research, approximately 50% of all South African adults fall into this so-called “sandwich generation”. Rather than fret about the tax burden, consumers should rather focus on improving their financial planning in order to meet their post-retirement goals. Apart from RAs, consumers can also make use of tax-free savings accounts as a means of gaining relief from taxes. The trick is to rewire rather than retire. Instead of retiring from life rather look at how you can rewire for new challenges, one of which will be planning for your financial wellbeing. Errol Meyer is head of advisory services at Standard Bank Financial Consultants.