Delegates at this year’s Investing in African Mining Indaba are expressing a clear sense of optimism that positive change is coming to South Africa’s mining industry. Cyril Ramaphosa’s election as president of the ANC has created the possibility for a new approach and a new sense of political will to get things right in what remains one of the country’s most important economic sectors. Perhaps most critically, this would mean resolving the regulatory and legislative uncertainty that has been a major concern for investors for many years. It would also need new leadership at the Department of Mineral Resources (DMR). While these are necessary conditions for restoring confidence in the country, they are only a starting point. In order to revitalise South African mining, there needs to be a clear, coherent vision for what a successful industry looks like. Sustainable economic development “We need to see a stabilisation of the political environment, and rebuild trust between government, capital and labour,” says managing partner of Baker McKenzie, Morne van der Merwe. “I absolutely believe that if there is not a concerted effort to bring those stakeholders together to talk, to develop an environment of trust, it will take us a very long time to achieve what we want to achieve.” Critically there has to be a conversation around establishing a sustainable economic model for mining. “You have to find the balance between being investor-friendly and attracting foreign investment, and making sure that you avoid the old models where nothing is left behind for the local community and the country,” Van der Merwe says. “Everybody needs to leave the party with a balloon. Up until now there has been a feeling that Africa doesn’t have a balloon, but they’re seeing someone else leaving the party with a balloon. That model is not sustainable in terms of long-term economic development.” This is a balance that can only be achieved when all stakeholders recognise their common interests. In that environment, government, labour and business can have honest discussions about the practical steps that need to be taken to support the industry. Clarity and cohesion Partner at Webber Wentzel, Jonathan Veeran, believes that one of those steps has to be better policy cohesion between different government departments. Any mining operation needs to deal with a number of different departments for approvals and licences and there is a lack of synchronisation between them. “The Department of Trade and Industry is creating incentive schemes to encourage investment, but they don’t have oversight over primary ministries like mineral resources, land affairs or environmental affairs,” says Veeran. “So while we’ve been making the right noises, someone needs to sit above and see the full spectrum of policy cohesion.” Veeran also argues that an open access regulatory regime is critical. In other words all the information that the DMR uses to make any licencing decisions must be public. “If you have access to all the information the minister uses to make a decision, you can test whether it’s fair or not,” says Veeran. “This will go a long way to combating corruption and improving the service of the DMR. Officials will know that any action is open to review and hopefully that will be an incentive to be more efficient.” Herbert Smith Freehills partner and Africa co-chair Peter Leon says that the time taken on applications for mining rights also has to be addressed. “This is a major issue because there are no time limits in the Act [the Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development Act],” Leon says. “I think you need to put time limits into the Act so that the DMR has to do things by certain dates.” These are the kinds of steps necessary to send the message that South Africa is serious about the future of its mining industry. But at the same time, business has to commit to playing its role in acting responsibly and operating more inclusive, more sustainable models. “It’s vital that we see transformation in our economy, without which we won’t have a sustainable socio-economic environment,” Van der Merwe says. “We need to transform the mining sector, but we need to do it in such a way that there is stimulus for foreign direct investment. “At the moment the message is almost that we’re closed for business, and if we are not going to open the doors we are not going to see international development coming in to meet the kinds of challenges we have – stimulating the economy and creating jobs.”