“There is no doubt that South Africa still has a lot of opportunities and faces many challenges. I think in the long term, the country’s political and economic fortunes will turn around.” This is how Sol Kerzner, the man whose hotel and resort career spans over 50 years, has described South Africa’s state of the nation as he embarks on a career comeback. The 82-year-old, who is widely known as the “Sun King” for developing North West-based leisure resort Sun City in 1979 and a throng of One & Only Resorts in 2002, is carving out a career in residential property. Kerzner, together with his eldest daughter Andrea, is developing a luxury residential estate on the slopes of his family property in Leeukoppie, which is one of Cape Town’s most exclusive suburbs. It was only three years ago that Kerzner retired as chairman of Kerzner International Holdings following the purchase of a significant stake by Investment Corporation of Dubai in his company.  He has come out of retirement to oversee the R1 billion residential project called Kerzner Estate. He sees the investment as a vote of confidence in South Africa, at a time when some investors have taken a leap out of country.  You don’t have to look far for reasons behind this: increasing political uncertainty, rising taxes for ultra-high-net-worth individuals to plug declining tax revenues, weak economic growth and populist policy proposals including expropriation of land without compensation. However, the Johannesburg-born Kerzner is unfazed. “I think South Africa is still an exciting country. We, as the Kerzner family, are certainly committed to the country,” he said in an interview with Moneyweb. The ten-hectare estate was bought by Kerzner for R2.25 million in 1983. In today’s terms, R2.25 million probably wouldn’t buy an apartment in Cape Town’s Atlantic Seaboard suburbs of Bantry Bay, Fresnaye, Clifton and Sea Point. Kerzner spends most of his time in London, but when visiting South Africa, he’s often at the Leeukoppie estate. “We have built five houses for members of the family. It’s an estate that I have shared with my family and friends since 1983,” he said. His daughter is running the planning of the estate, which boasts 48 luxury houses built by six architects. Developers and architects began breaking ground on the project more than two years ago. “There is an appetite for this kind of offering. The trend is still towards secure lifestyle estates as people are consolidating and don’t want large houses,” said Andrea.  Kerzner Estate Pictures: Supplied  Kerzner Estate Prices for the three-, four- and five-bedrooms houses, which range between 374 square metres and 738 square metres on stands of 1 500 square metres, start from R20.5 million (including Vat). This price is in line with trophy homes on the Atlantic Seaboard. The residential estate was officially launched on Tuesday and the first release of homes is expected to be within the next 18 months. The timing of the estate’s launch might be questionable. Industry players are reporting slower sales in Cape Town’s luxury property market due to the city’s water shortage, which has prompted buyers to halt their buying decisions. House price growth has also been impacted by the water crunch. Although Cape Town house prices are still beating inflation, prices slowed to 9.7% in the fourth quarter of 2017 from highs of 15% in the first quarter of 2016, according to figures from Standard Bank Group. Ross Levin, Seeff Atlantic Seaboard and City Bowl developments director, who is also responsible for marketing the Kerzner Estate, said the water crisis is a concern but he is still seeing interest from local and international buyers.