For a moment, the gathering in Davos and the hype around it had suspended the reality South Africa is currently facing. The difference among the Ramaphosa-led ANC group and those of the outgoing party president is not something that can be bandaged over, or has the various campaigning slate miraculously dissolved because unity has become the theme. In fact, I believe there will be continued bargaining by various key individuals as the power shifts from one side to the other. After all, the departing Zuma would want is to be guaranteed no court case will come to haunt his retirement. To ‘gooi’ a spanner into the unpredictable pot that is ANC politics, the SABC recently reported that “former President Thabo Mbeki says he stands ready to support the governing party as it embarks on a renewal process”. The salient question is: what happens next? At present, changes in the global economy have put considerable strain on the already ailing national economy and are contributing to South Africa’s expanding social dislocations. It cannot be denied how the playing field of globalisation has not yielded the desired results for South Africa or any of the developing nations. The benefits of free trade and open markets has not favoured us. Globalisation has had its winners and losers. For South Africa, wage stagnation and slowing growth post the global financial crisis, coupled with our own ineffective policy agenda, has made us the losers. Like spilt ink, gross inequality has quickly spread and stained almost every aspect of the working class, the poor and unemployed and the periphery of the economic cake. To this writer, the failure lies in policymakers and their business partners’ inability to unite behind a common vision. You may ask, where is evidence of this? I will point you to information presented by the *ILO in its 2016/2017 Global Wage Report. The report reads: “There is now a large literature showing that in a majority of countries across the world, wage growth in recent decades has lagged behind the growth of labour productivity, leading to a fall in the labour share of GDP.” I therefore return to the question: what happens next? After the cameras and spotlight of the world media has stopped shining on our business and government leaders, what must South Africa do to build on enthusiasm shown from the key investors who attend the World Economic Forum gathering. I have a few suggestions, but will only focus on two areas that are not related to the obvious tasks of rooting out corruption or asserting dominance. I believe there are several ways where – through common vision – business and government can create programmes that can simultaneously address economic growth, wage inequality and unemployment May I point out the obvious? Inequality is usually measured by comparing incomes across households in a country. I contend that there is also a different kind of inequality wrought on my people migrating from the rural to urban areas in search of better life and jobs. The impact of this form of inequality is no less worrying, high levels of unemployment trigger social breakdown that has often led to crime. First – The government, supported by the business sector, must ensure it provides affordable housing programmes in the country’s urban areas. This is particularly important for the inner city, where it is becoming inherently unaffordable to those with medium or low income. In other words, demonstrate that South Africa can reduce the rising poverty trend in its cities, which is often attributed to internal factors such as the failure to maintain infrastructure and the lack of preparedness in adjusting to the influx of  rural to urban migrant workers. Second – There must be clear and implementable policies on rural regeneration and poverty reduction. Policy makers can look to their Brics partner India who, in the 1990s, deliberately implemented antipoverty programmes such as Green Revolution instead of the trade liberalisation, which was the then trend. Lessons can be drawn from Indonesia too who, through its version of the Green Revolution, macroeconomic policies, stabilisation of rice prices and massive investment in rural infrastructure, played a substantial role in the large reduction of rural poverty. Conversely, opening the economy to trade and attracting long-term capital flows need not make the poor worse off if appropriate domestic policies and institutions are in place, particularly to help shift production to more marketable goods and help workers enter new jobs. Simplistic populist rhetoric won’t do and will not solve the rising poverty and crisis level unemployment we are facing. Not when the country has the pressure of its young demographics. Lest we forget, no aspect of South Africa’s economy is more vulnerable than its inability to integrate its economy and young population to the economic globalisation which does not just bring opportunities but major constrains that can make the poor worse off if the country doesn’t have appropriate policies and the right kind of leadership to implement it. * International Labour Organisation (ILO): Global Wage Report 2016/17