Short-seller Viceroy Research’s damning report on Capitec Bank Holdings may have been the talk of South Africa’s markets this week, but its devastating impact on the firm’s shares is already waning. Several analysts have increased their ratings on Capitec since Viceroy issued a report questioning the state of the company’s finances January 30. The report hastened a drop in the firm’s shares, which plunged 25% in the four days through Wednesday. The stock rose for a second day on Friday, and has already retraced almost half its losses. The rebound came after Capitec said customers are sticking with the bank and the National Treasury called for a probe into the “reckless” way in which Viceroy criticised the company’s lending practices, only to profit from bets against the stock. A roundup of the analyst calls:  Some analysts were scathing about Viceroy’s motives in publishing the report. “Viceroy is not an independent and credible research firm,” said Iraj Abedian, head of Pan-African Investments and Research Services, an associate of New York-based Global Source Partners. “Short-selling is not illegal, but pretending to be a research house while they’re a hedge-fund operator, making money in a predatory style, is breaching the codes of ethics.” Viceroy didn’t immediately respond to an emailed request for comment on February 2. The firm, which said January 30 it would respond to Capitec’s rebuttal, is yet to release any follow-up to its original comments. “We welcome any lawful investigations into impropriety in our report, which is publicly sourced,” Viceroy tweeted in response to the Treasury’s comments on Thursday. Capitec’s shares rose 6.5% on Friday in Johannesburg, extending their gains over the past two days to about 12%. A close at this level would be the biggest two-day increase since April 2008. Short interest in the stock increased to 1.28% of the shares outstanding on January 31 from 1.16% on January 26, when Capitec started falling, according to IHS Markit data.  Viceroy, led by a former UK social worker and two Australians, accused Capitec of refinancing defaulted loans with new debt in a report published on its website. It said the state should place Capitec into curatorship. Capitec described the analysis as one-sided and inaccurate in press conferences, interviews and statements and responded fully to each of the allegations on its website. The central bank and National Treasury didn’t see the same risks as Viceroy, with the central bank issuing a statement on Tuesday saying that it had no evidence to suggest the lender’s stability was in question. “The Viceroy report provides no basis to put any bank under curatorship,” the Treasury said on Thursday. © 2018 Bloomberg