Paying lip service to the Davos theme of creating a shared future in a fractured world, world leaders took the opportunity to punt for investment in between wining and dining with business leaders. The South African delegation’s Davos outing may have dominated the headlines in South Africa, but it is Trump who is hogging the overseas headlines. Our Davos inspired euphoria should come down to earth. South Africa has strong competition in trying to attract investment, and we may only achieve “a country to watch” status. Whereas Deputy President Cyril Ramaphosa addressed a packed room of 130 delegates, President Trump attracted a couple of thousand. And even though not everyone in the audience was a fan of Trump, he is, after all, a master salesman. And the US wants investment. The US stock market is hitting unprecedented highs. During the course of the Davos week US officials even managed to make “America first does not mean America alone” almost palatable. And what better surety can investors have than the president of the world’s strongest economy proclaiming that “America is open for business and we are competitive once again”. Trump has slashed the corporate tax rate from 35% to 21%, and is cutting regulations. Consumer confidence is at record highs, and unemployment is at its lowest. The US stock market is soaring, with the tech giants of Facebook, Microsoft, Alphabet, Amazon and Apple, having a market capitalisation of $3.6 trillion. Trump’s speech may have been criticised by the liberals, but he knows how to provide certainty to investors and attract the money. Jostling for position, Emmanuel Macron also announced that “France is back”. His underlying message of “invest, share and protect” did not prevent his accusers labelling him as the “president of the rich”. France has also reduced protection for workers and lowered corporate taxes for smaller companies from 33.33% to 28%. France is particularly targeting the tech giants for investment. The deputy president may be hopeful that he has attracted new investment into SA. But what can he offer? He cannot even be certain that he will be giving the State of the Union address on February 8. And he has not yet reigned in those members of the political elite who continue to utter conflicting statements. After all, he only managed a narrow victory in December. SA has run out of money to offer new incentives to attract investment, and the business environment remains uncertain: Struggling to clear itself of state capture and corruption, SA must get its own house in order before it can compete with the rest of the world for investment. Until we do this, no one will be sending us a life raft.