There’s still time to get in on the year’s best bond trade. South Africa’s rand debt has earned investors a total return of 11.4% in dollars in 2018, according to Bloomberg indexes. That’s more than double the gain for Mexican peso bonds, the second best among 19 major emerging markets tracked by Bloomberg. Yields on benchmark government securities dropped to the lowest since May 2015 on Wednesday, after a budget  speech from Finance Minister Malusi Gigaba convinced investors that the government would avoid another downgrade to junk. Speaking in Cape Town, he outlined plans to increase value added tax, boost revenue and narrow this fiscal year’s budget deficit from initial forecasts.  With Moody’s Investors Service deciding by the end of next month whether to lower the country’s local-currency credit rating to sub-investment, investors were looking for evidence the government would curb debt and trim the deficit under the leadership of newly elected President Cyril Ramaphosa. Rates on local notes maturing in December 2026 fell 12 basis points to 7.98% by 6:32 pm in Johannesburg, extending their drop since mid-November to almost 150 basis points. Morgan Stanley analysts including James Lord and Min Dai are predicting a further fall to 7.7%, if the South African Reserve Bank lives up to market expectations by cutting interest rates. “A combination of better growth, lower inflation, and a central bank rate-cut bodes well for the local bond market,” they said in a note to clients on Wednesday. “Coupled with a stronger rand and rate-cut expectations, we believe government bonds could have a strong rally.”  Citigroup recommended investors buy rand notes maturing in 2041 and target a 70 basis-point drop in the yields to 8.2%. “We believe that the markets will digest today’s budget positively with the Ministry of Finance embracing VAT hikes as a way to contain revenue slippage,” said Luis Costa, an emerging-market strategist at the New York-based bank. The spending plans would probably convince Moody’s, the last of the three major ratings firms to have South Africa at investment grade, to keep it at that level, he said. After Gigaba’s budget speech, derivatives traders increased their bets that the central bank will cut rates. Forward-rate agreements beginning in 12 months fell to almost 50 basis points below the three-month Johannesburg Interbank Agreed Rate, all but pricing in two cuts of 25 points each in the next year. The last time the gap was that large was in September.  Standard Charted sees the SARB reducing its repurchase rate by 25 basis points at its next meeting on March 28. It doubts that would put investors off the rand, which it said in a note Wednesday may strengthen another 6% to 11 against the dollar. Not everyone is convinced global money managers would continue being so bullish on the currency, which has rallied 24% since November, in such a scenario. “The benign inflation outlook and likely rand rally off the back of no action from Moody’s is likely to see the central bank reduce its policy rate, removing some of the support for the currency and driving some carry trade flows away from South Africa,” said Natalie Rivett, a senior analyst at Informa Global Markets in London. The FTSE/JSE Africa All Share Index climbed 1.2% and the cost of insuring the nation’s debt against default over five years extended a drop after the budget to 143 basis points. Ramaphosa has pledged to revive an economy that is emerging from its second recession in a decade. Foreign investors bought the most South African bonds on Tuesday since October 2012, and have purchased local stocks for the past 10 days, Johannesburg Stock Exchange data show. “It’s a decent budget in a very difficult environment; we’re still hoping that more changes will be implemented, more than discussed,” said Owen Nkomo, the chief executive officer of Johannesburg-based money manager Inkunzi Wealth Group. “We’ve done a lot of talking. It’s time to actually implement.” © 2018 Bloomberg