Pulp and paper group Sappi on Wednesday reported lower first-quarter profits and warned of a slightly lower “operating performance” in the second quarter due to the impact of the stronger rand versus the US dollar on its South African operations. The Johannesburg-based company, one of the world’s leading pulp and paper producers, is expanding into higher value speciality products, which it said would put it in a stronger position from 2019 onwards. Profit in the first quarter ended December fell to $63 million from $90 million in the same period a year ago, while sales rose to $1.33 billion from $1.30 billion. Earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortisation, which excludes special items, fell to $172 million from $201 million in the same period a year ago. Sappi said on a like-for-like basis this was comparable to the $181 million generated last year before the addition of $20 million related to an additional accounting week. “Profit for the period decreased … as a result of the extra week last year and a $19 million non-cash income statement charge following the lowering of the corporate income tax rate in the United States and its impact on the deferred tax asset,” Sappi said in a statement. Sappi’s shares fell more than 3%, but recouped some of these losses and were 1.6% lower by 1301 GMT. Avior Capital Markets investment analyst Wade Napier said the share price fall was probably an overreaction. “When guys see big declines of 14% year-on-year ebitda they probably tend to over react and then as the market digests results maybe the share price will pull back.” Sappi said capital expenditure in 2018 would be about $500 million on conversions of mills and projects which are focused on higher margin growth businesses, including dissolving wood pulp and speciality packaging. “This will position us for stronger profitability from 2019 onwards,” it said in a statement. In December, Sappi agreed to buy a speciality paper unit from Switzerland-based Cham Paper Group for 146.5 million Swiss francs ($155.95 million). It said on Wednesday it will conclude the acquisition at the end of February. ($1 = 0.9394 Swiss francs)by