Here are some of the things people in markets are talking about today. Selloff Last Friday’s stock market rout in the US spread to Asian and European markets this morning. The MSCI Asia Pacific Index dropped 1.5% overnight, with Japan’s Topix Index closing 2.2 % lower. In Europe, the Stoxx 600 Index was 1.1% lower at 5:45 am Eastern Time, with utilities the only sector putting in a positive performance. S&P 500 futures pared earlier losses to 0.3% as investors assess whether the weak start to February is the beginning of a major move, or just a blip. Bonds calmer One thing that may give equity traders some solace this morning is the relative calm in the bond market. The yield on the US 10-year Treasury was at 2.849% by 5:45 am, close to unchanged from Friday’s close. Worries that spiking bond yields are driving the equity slump should ease if the bond market holds at current levels. But while sovereign bonds seem to be stabilising, S&P Global Ratings has warned the next default cycle in corporate debt may not be far away. Services A composite Purchasing Managers’ Index for the euro area rose to 58.8 in January, with the increase toward the strongest level in almost 12 years driven by a faster-than-expected expansion in the services sector, particularly in Germany. There was less good news for the UK, where IHS Markit’s Purchasing Managers Index for services unexpectedly fell to 53 for the month. Traders will keep an eye on Mario Draghi’s testimony to the European Parliament later today to see if the region’s continued economic expansion will lead to any hints of a sooner-than-expected end to the ECB’s accommodative monetary stance. Deal near? Talks in Germany on forming a new government that would give Angela Merkel a fourth term as chancellor have been extended past yesterday’s deadline as both Merkel’s Christian Democratic-led bloc and the Social Democrats edge closer to agreement. While Merkel’s chances of continuing in her position may be increasing, those of British Prime Minister Theresa May could be declining as hard choices over Brexit seem to be pushing members of her ruling Conservative Party close to open revolt. Higher offer Broadcom is planning to raise its offer for Qualcomm to around $120 billion, or $80 to $82 a share, according to a person with knowledge of the matter, in an attempt to force Qualcomm to the table for the largest-ever technology deal. Broadcom intends to announce the new bid later this morning, according to the person. Shares in the target company were 6.1% higher at $70.10 in pre-market trading. © 2018 Bloomberg