Eskom’s embattled head of generation Matshela Koko on Friday morning resigned from the power utility, the only employer he ever worked for, but only after pleading not guilty on all the charges against him.  Advocate Frans Barrie on behalf of Koko made the shock announcement, shortly after the start of his disciplinary hearing. Koko was found not guilty on several charges in December after a disciplinary hearing that was widely questioned, but Eskom brought fresh charges against him. The hearing on these charges was set to begin on Friday. In a strange move, counsel for Eskom refused to accept Koko’s resignation and insisted that the hearing continues. Koko and his legal team walked out. Advocate Nazeer Cassim, who chaired the hearing, asked the Eskom team whether there would be any sense in continuing with the proceedings, since the employment contract has come to an end. Eskom’s legal team contested that, saying Koko cannot end the employment relationship unilaterally. Eskom has to accept it and it doesn’t. Eskom wants to see him dismissed, not for him to resign. Cassim then asked whether that position is based on an instruction from the Eskom board, but was told the instruction came from Eskom’s interim group chief executive Phakamani Hadebe, “who has the authority”. Cassim then adjourned the proceedings until midday, for the Eskom legal representatives to consider their position and to consult legal sources. After reconvening at 12:00, counsel for Eskom informed the chairman that Eskom accepted that there was clear legal precedent that a unilateral resignation by an employee terminates the employment relationship and the hearing therefore couldn’t proceed. Eskom’s position is that Koko’s resignation was presented in a way that does not comply with his employment contract. The utility reserves its rights against Koko with regard to any payments due to him, including his pension and might institute civil claims against him. Hadebe, Eskom former chair Zethemba Khoza and board member professor Malegapuru Makgoba earlier tried to convince Koko to resign and later put an ultimatum to him, which he fought in the Labour Court. Read: Koko’s job is safe (for now) Hadebe said in an affidavit to the court that it was in the interest of South Africa that Koko leave Eskom. He explained that Koko was “the face of corruption at Eskom” and funders refused to lend Eskom money unless senior executives seen to be corrupt were removed. It was after Koko obtained an interim order from the Labout Court to stop Eskom from firing him summarily, but to follow due process, that Eskom brought new charges against him. Koko faced four charges: 1. Distributing confidential Eskom to a third party; 2. Misleading parliament by understating his own role in the McKinsey/Trillian transaction; 3. Accepting a “business courtesy” and failing to declare it. This refers to trips to Dubai allegedly paid for by Gupta-related Sahara Computers; 4. Failing to prevent unlawful payment being made with regard to the McKinsey/Trillian deal. Refusing to sign the instruction was not enough, according to Eskom. Before announcing Koko’s resignation he pleaded not guilty on all charges and submitted a plea explanation. He denied having sent confidential Eskom information to a thrid party. He said he sent it to an e-mail address given to him by suspended Eskom head of legal Suzanne Daniels, which she said she used for information she had to convey to the chairman of the Eskom board. It was therefore not sent to a third party. Koko denied having misled parliament. He said he responded to parliament’s question and previous statements by Daniels at the same forum, which he considers to be lies. He denied any obligation to declare his visit to Dubai with his wife and son to Eskom and says Daniels made the bookings. He was unaware of any involvement of Sahara Computers and if Daniels involved them, she must explain. Koko also denied that he was obliged to act differently to prevent the McKinsey/Trillian payments. After his resignation was announced, Koko told Moneyweb that he did not receive any golden handshake. In fact he earlier refused such offers, he said. He said he was resigning with a clear conscience, but does so on behalf of his family who is taking strain as a result of the accusations against him. Koko further stated that he was considering civil claims of defamation following widespread allegations made in the public against him.