It has been a tumultuous time for Resilient Reit, with the property group facing scathing allegations of accounting irregularities and a bruising share price rout that might eject its shares from the JSE Top 40 index. The shares of Resilient itself and sister companies Nepi Rockcastle, Fortress and Greenbay have been tainted by tough questions from short-seller 36ONE Asset Management and sell-side researcher Arqaam Capital on why the companies have traded at hefty premiums to their net asset value (NAV). To recap: The Resilient companies allegedly artificially inflate distributable income (intended for dividend payments) through the inclusion of interest income earned from loans to its black economic empowerment schemes. The companies have also been accused of using the cross-holdings in one another to influence premium NAV valuations. In addition directors stand accused of buying substantial volumes of shares to artificially inflate the price. Read more: What is the Resilient stable accused of? Fears that Resilient, Nepi Rockcastle, Fortress, and Greenbay might be the next Steinhoff sparked a frantic sell-off of their shares, which have plunged in a range between 13% and 63% in the year to February 23 (see below).  Source: Anchor Stockbrokers Research The wild stock swings have prompted the JSE and Financial Services Board to investigate the recent trading of shares, while Resilient has launched its own internal probe. The value destruction goes beyond the individual shares as the SA listed property (Sapy) index – which makes up 21 of the biggest property companies on the JSE – has shed total returns by 18.2% in the year-to-February 23. Resilient itself and sister companies Nepi Rockcastle, Fortress and Greenbay make up as much as 40% of the Sapy index. Given the continued sell-off in shares, investors might be wondering whether the Resilient stocks are bargains or value traps. There is no doubting what the directors think. Directors of Resilient and the three sister companies have emerged as the largest buyers of shares in recent weeks. Des de Beer, the CEO of Resilient, has been the biggest buyer, snapping up about R70 million Resilient stock in four tranches during the month of February. The purchases were executed when Resilient’s share price was trading at a narrow range of R95.79 and R99.48. Resilient’s volatile share price hit a three-and-a-half-year low of R67.70 on Thursday but has since recovered to R70.85 at the time of writing, implying that De Beer’s purchases have lost about R10 million in value. “I have increased my investment in Resilient as I see good long-term value,” said De Beer when asked why he bought more Resilient stock. There have been similar director dealings at Fortress, with CEO Mark Stevens buying R6 million in Fortress stock during the early days of February. Directors at Resilient’s sister companies Nepi Rockcastle and Greenbay have also been in on the action  in recent weeks. In its 50-page leaked report, 36ONE questioned whether the buying of Resilient companies shares by key directors is an attempt to support the share prices. Resilient rejects this assertion saying it doesn’t determine the market price of its shares and the fund manager’s “untested allegations” of share price manipulation are not substantiated and “will not stand up to independent scrutiny”. Granted, directors are allowed to purchase company shares when they view them to be undervalued by the market, a vote of confidence in a company’s future or to reduce the number of shares in issuance. However, when a company like Resilient and its sister companies are facing three share trading investigations (JSE, FSB and Resilient’s own), it might not be prudent for directors to buy shares, said Garreth Elston, an analyst at Golden Section Capital. “It’s not the time for any insiders to be buying shares until those investigations had run their course and everything is clear. On an ethical basis, no one should be doing any insider buying or any of the associated companies,” said Elston. Given the frantic sell-off in Resilient stock, directors could argue that the shares are undervalued and it would make sense for the company to buy back shares – a decision backed by Resilient shareholders a few years ago. Elston, who has long rated Resilient companies as expensive, believed that the only stock in the Resilient stable that has overcorrected and justifies directors purchasing shares is Fortress. His own calculations point to Resilient, Nepi Rockcastle and Greenbay still trading at a premium to their NAV. Golden Section Capital – Listed Property Research   Company NAV GS Justified Spot NAV Last Close * PNAV (Co.) GS Justified Price Fortress REIT Ltd. A FFA R17,39 R15,06 R16,00 0,92 R14,76 Fortress REIT Ltd. B FFB R35,08 R16,42 R16,05 0,46 R15,60 Greenbay GRP R1,41 R1,33 R1,31 0,93 R1,29 NEPI Rockcastle NRP R102,11 R95,26 R113,75 1,11 R101,93 Resilient REIT Ltd. RES R105,35 R70,60 R69,95 0,66 R65,66 * EURZAR: 14,3818    * 2018-02-22      Source: Bloomberg 