Over the last few years, a recurring theme at the annual Investing in African Mining Indaba has been the uncertainty in the South African mining industry. Primarily, this has been around regulatory and legislative issues that have made investors very wary of committing any capital to the country. This year, that theme has certainly not gone away. In 2017 the Minister of Mineral Resources, Mosebenzi Zwane, unilaterally announced a new Mining Charter that significantly shifted the requirements for black ownership and employment equity at mining companies, as well as the companies from which they procure any goods and services. The Chamber of Mines very quickly launched an application to have it set aside, and their case will be heard later this month. At the same time, the Mineral and Petroleum Resources Development Act (MPRDA) Amendment Bill remains an issue. It has been pending since December 2012, and has become so controversial it is inevitable that if it were ever to be signed into law its constitutionality would be challenged in court. Investor reaction As managing partner at Baker McKenzie, Morne van der Merwe explains, these two matters continue to create a great deal of uncertainty in the local mining sector. “The issue with the 2017 charter is that there is a substantial departure from some of the principles that were agreed [on] and applied for a long period of time under the 2010 charter,” says Van der Merwe. “And the fact that there wasn’t proper consultation meant that there wasn’t acceptance, which led to this situation where it is being challenged in court.” With the MPRDA Amendment Bill, the industry’s primary concerns revolve around its progress through parliament and its lack of clarity. “Poorly drafted legislation creates two problems,” says Jonathan Veeran, a partner at Webber Wentzel. “The first is that administering the act becomes problematic because if I don’t know what the act means I can’t administer it. And, similarly, the person who needs to comply with the act doesn’t know what they must comply with.” Van der Merwe says that he has personally seen how the uncertainty created by the MPRDA has impacted on investment. “We act for certain international companies in the mining sector who five to seven years ago were looking very seriously at further investment,” he says. “They were even looking at developing beneficiation plants, which would have led to creating jobs, which in turn would have led to the kind of socioeconomic development one would ideally want to see, but that all came to halt. They said we cannot spend another cent on further investment. I saw that decision making process and at the core of it was uncertainty.” New optimism However, there is also a sense at this year’s indaba that things may be changing. Cyril Ramaphosa’s election as ANC president and the way he is already making his influence felt in areas such as the appointment of a new board at Eskom are creating optimism that the troubles in the mining sector could also be tackled. “I think there is hope,” says Veeran. “Generally there is a sense in the industry that things are going to change.” During his recent trip to the World Economic Forum in Davos, Ramaphosa said that if the Mining Charter is standing in the way of the development of the mining industry, then it needs to be looked at. This could not happen without Zwane being moved out of the portfolio. Ramaphosa is also particularly well placed to deal with issues in mining because of his history with the National Union of Mineworkers. He understands the industry and what it needs to be successful. This is giving many people renewed confidence. “You could get to a tipping point quite easily, where we can can come off this very negative path,” says Van der Merwe. “I think these are exciting times for the mining sector. I’m feeling much better now than I felt a year back. There are signs of positive change.” A proper business case Reinvigorating the industry would however not only require sorting out the regulatory and legislative concerns, but also dealing with the dysfunction at the Department of Mineral Resources and resolving issues in the bureaucratic system. “You don’t just need to fix the rules,” Van der Merwe says. “You need clear and efficient administration in how you apply them.” Mending the trust deficit that has grown between business, near-mine communities, government and labour is also imperative. “I think all of those parties need to come together and reassess what’s important,” Veeran argues. They need to rebuild trust, because unless they are all working together no project will ever get done.” There is however a clear sense that these goals are now achievable, and if they are, this country will have a lot to offer. “South Africa has the best endowment of mineral resources in the world,” Veeran says. “As technology develops we can also mine deeper, access other ore bodies, develop ways to use water more sustainably and make less of an impact on the environment. We need to take advantage of that. We must encourage mining companies to come back. And if we make a proper business case, I think we will.” Read: Anglo takes down SA sale sign