Here’s what caught our attention on Tuesday A number of ANC party members have come out over the past couple of days, saying that meetings are being held to discuss the fate of President Jacob Zuma. The ANC top six and the highest decision-making body, the National Working Committee (NWC), also met over the weekend. Late on Monday, the ANC NWC resolved that it will have a special NEC meeting on Wednesday to recall Zuma, a day before the State of the Nation address. An anti-Zuma picket will also be taking place outside the Union Buildings in Pretoria on Tuesday. Naspers has requested Investec to withdraw an analytical report it compiled on Naspers, saying that it should be “valued at a 30% discount to its assets”, due to what Investec calls, “friction costs”. Naspers said the report is damaging to its share price and is inaccurate and has asked Investec to amend the errors. In a separate development on Tuesday, Investec also announced that it will be making changes to its executive board. CEO Stephen Koseff and managing director Bernard Kantor will step down from their respective roles in October this year, but will serve as executive directors till March 2019. The mining company announced on Tuesday that it will be releasing its results for the financial year, ended December 31 2017 on February 19. It is anticipating that headline earnings and headline earnings per share will increase between R3.65 billion and R4 billion. The improvement is attributed to strong operational performance, strict cost control and higher platinum group metal sales volumes. It’s the second day of the annual Mining Indaba, taking place in Cape Town. This is an annual meet where mining specialists and investors come together to discuss the challenges facing the industry. On Monday, themes of new change and hope were being discussed, Moneyweb reported. With 2017’s Mining Charter under scrutiny and ANC President Cyril Ramaphosa’s resolution to tackle it, change is anticipated. The South African Chamber of Commerce Industry’s (Sacci’s) Business Confidence Index (BCI) reached its highest level (99.7) in two-and-a-half years in January. Business confidence increased by 3.3 index points, after reaching 96.4 in December. The Sacci BCI reached its lowest level in August 2017, at 89.6%, but has improved gradually since then.