On my way out of the office one day, I bumped into an entrepreneur who’d recently started on one of our business growth programmes. I asked her about her business and the biggest challenge she was facing. She said she was really battling to find new clients. Upon enquiring about her plans for the rest of the day, she responded that she was heading home after closing time at 13:00 “because no one does business on a Friday”. It is concerning when entrepreneurs tell me this. It’s a widely held myth that Friday productivity levels are lower because staff are more focused on their plans for the weekend, and it seems that many businesses have shortened their Friday working hours as a result. In my opinion, this is a wasted opportunity. Friday is just as important as any other day of the week when it comes to finding new business. If you see an opportunity on a Friday – even if it’s 16:59 – you need to grasp it! I asked her, “If your largest competitor closes their office at lunch time today, shouldn’t you be jumping at the chance to engage with those of their customers who’re still at work? They could potentially become your customers.” As an entrepreneur, you should wake up every Friday morning more determined than ever to squeeze out as much business as possible. That’s why I call it Squeezy Friday. You need to make the most out of every opportunity, even it means you’re working while your competitors are out sipping cocktails. By doing so, you could end off your week with two new deals in the pipeline. There are endless opportunities for you to squeeze out as much business as possible on Friday afternoons. To take advantage, you should do the following: Double or even triple your current sales activity targets If you usually make ten calls a week to new clients, you should double it to 20. Set up reminders in your calendar to follow up with clients. Keep calling and pushing harder to get new deals through that have been on your target list for months. Be hyper-focused on your competitor’s clients If your competitor is planning a big weekend, he or she is probably not going to contact clients. You should be proactive and contact those clients yourself. Tell them about your business and what it offers. There is a good chance that they would rather do business with someone who doesn’t close at 13:00 on a Friday. Offer new specials Over the course of the year, most retailers advertise deals for things like Easter, Valentine’s Day, Mother’s Day and Father’s Day. Often these specials are clichéd and not powerful because everyone has similar offerings. Review your current product offering and develop a whole new special that is fresh. For example, if you usually offer a four-day workshop twice a year, think about offering a “light” version of the same workshop over two days at a reduced price. If you are guilty of closing shop early on Fridays, change this habit immediately! You must create an inner urgency to jump at every opportunity no matter how tired you feel at the end of the week. Keep squeezing because you will reap the results in the long run. Allon Raiz is CEO of Raizcorp.