South Africa may have a new finance minister soon following the replacement of its president, but whoever replaces Malusi Gigaba will still face a R50.8 billion ($4.4 billion) hole in the nation’s finances. With growth in Africa’s most-industrialized economy lagging that of peers after its second recession in less than a decade, tax collections have dwindled. That’s intensified the difficulty faced by Gigaba at the National Treasury in striking the balance between finding more revenue and not choking off the country’s fragile recovery. In October, his officials estimated public debt will exceed 60% of gross domestic product by 2022. The next month, the government pledged to cut spending by a further R25 billion over the next three years to avert another downgrade of its rand debt to junk. Since then, Moody’s Investors Service has warned it might deliver just such a ratings cut, and an uncosted pledge by former President Jacob Zuma for free higher education for poor students added R12.7 billion to the country’s financial needs. Read more on former President Jacob Zuma’s impact on the economy These are the five biggest potential revenue-generating tax changes the minister may announce at the Feb. 21 budget.  South Africa could collect as much R22 billion if it raises the rate of value-added tax, a form of sales tax, by 1 percentage point to 15%, PwC estimates. It would be the first change since 1993. Removing the zero rating on fuel purchases could bring in another R3 billion, according to Citigroup Inc. Six of 10 respondents in a Bloomberg survey expect to see an increase in the rate. “Being a regressive tax, it has been avoided for political reasons,” Frank Blackmore, the chief economist at EF Consult in Pretoria, the capital, said. But it is a “definite possibility” given the country is running out of other revenue-generating options, he said. Health Minister Aaron Motsoaledi in July released a health-insurance policy document that said he wanted to remove the tax credit to users. This is to fund the proposed National Health Insurance plan that would cover all citizens. Taking the benefit away could add almost R20 billion. If the Treasury chooses not to adjust tax brackets to compensate for inflation, the government could reap as much as R15 billion in additional revenue, Citigroup said. Increasing this from 45% may bring in as much as R10 billion, depending on the new rate, Citigroup says. The levy affects about 103,000 people who earn more than R1.5 million annually and was raised from 41% in the year that ends in February. While the move wouldn’t be a large revenue generator, it would send “the right signal” in one of the world’s most unequal nations, Nedbank Group chief economist Dennis Dykes said. It would show “that everyone is paying their contribution,” he said. One thing that the Treasury has in its favor is a tax on sugary beverages, which Zuma signed into law in December. That may add as much as R11 billion to government coffers, Citigroup estimated. Raising taxes on alcohol and tobacco products may add as much as R6 billion, while a higher fuel levy could bring in up to R5 billion, according to Citigroup. And if ailing state-owned companies don’t dip further into government guarantees, the nation will have R16 billion in contingency reserves. © 2018 Bloomberg