President Cyril Ramaphosa’s new cabinet – which has been described as compromise cabinet as he had to appease all factions in an extremely divided and unity seeking ANC – has been largely welcomed by the business and labour community. The newly-elected South African president announced sweeping changes to his new cabinet on Monday night, appointing a mixed bag of ministers to help him to grow SA’s economy, restore investor and consumer confidence, and urgently root out corruption and patronage. This cabinet is a balancing act: some poor performing ministers that were inherited from former president Jacob Zuma’s flawed cabinet have been retained while other respected ministers have made a comeback. The most notable changes to Ramaphosa’s cabinet is the return of Nhlanhla Nene and Pravin Gordhan as finance and public enterprises ministers respectively. They replace Malusi Gigaba and Lynne Brown, who are perceived to be state capture enablers, allegedly appointing Gupta-allies in key board positions at state-owned enterprises. Nene and Gordhan are respected by the business and international investment community for being fiscally prudent with state resources, cutting wasteful expenditure in government and drawing a hard line on bailouts for underperforming state-owned entities. It’s on the basis that a broad spectrum of union and business leaders welcomed the return of Nene and Gordhan. “This long-awaited cabinet reshuffle is an important step in boosting confidence in the economy to restore growth and create jobs to attend to the challenges of poverty, inequality and unemployment, especially among the youth,” said Bonang Mohale, the CEO of Business Leadership South Africa (BLSA). Mohale said Ramaphosa needs to speed up the process of reviewing the size and configuration of national government departments to “demonstrate his commitment to urgently needed austerity measures”. Under Ramaphosa’s “new dawn” vision, he plans to review cabinet positions with a view of trimming SA’s cabinet, which bloated under Zuma’s nine-year reign. Zuma unceremoniously fired Nene in 2015 saying his name had been put forward to head the African Regional Centre of the Brics, which never materialised. Cas Coovadia, the MD of Banking Association South Africa (Basa), said Nene’s return to the National Treasury is key as the institution requires ethical leadership to meaningfully drive an environment that legitimately promotes growth, creates jobs and lifts South Africans out of poverty. “Treasury must be entrusted to a leader who is untainted by the devastation of corruption and state capture,” said Coovadia. On the other hand, Zuma fired Gordhan in 2017, citing a breakdown in their relationship. After he was fired, Gordhan became an ordinary MP and was involved in the Eskom inquiry to fix governance and corruption problems at the power utility. Mohale said Gordhan might turn the fortunes of state-owned enterprises around as they have become an “albatross around the neck of our fiscus”. “His appointment will strengthen government’s hand in dealing with state capture and corruption, and most importantly, it will facilitate the efforts to address the governance, leadership and capital structures of the SOEs,” he said. Retention of compromised ministers Ramaphosa chopped ministers implicated in state capture and other forms of wrongdoing including Mosebenzi Zwane (Mineral Resources), Lynne Brown (Public Enterprises), Des van Rooyen (Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs), Faith Muthambi (Public Service and Administration), Nathi Nhleko (Public works), Bongani Bongo (State security) and David Mahlobo (Energy). However, he shuffled controversial ministers to other government departments. These include finance minister Malusi Gigaba, now home affairs minister, water affairs minister Nomvula Mokonyane, now communication minister and social development minister Bathabile Dlamini, who is the minister in the Presidency responsible for women. Dlamini is responsible for the social grants fiasco, which nearly placed the livelihoods of more than ten million social grant beneficiaries at risk. She faces a Constitutional Court-mandated inquiry on whether she should personally pay legal costs as the grants fiasco reached SA’s highest court. Meanwhile, Mokonyane, a fierce Jacob Zuma defender, responded slowly to severe water shortages as drought conditions have ravaged SA’s agricultural land. Basa’s Coovadia and BLSA’s Mohale said they were concerned about the retention of individuals who were still under the cloud of state capture and maladministration. The appointment of Gwede Mantashe as mineral resources minister was given the thumbs up by the labour community. Mantashe worked closely with Ramaphosa when he was the general secretary of the National Union of Mineworkers in the 80s. “Mantashe has a long history in and good understanding of the mining sector… We hope that his appointment into the ministry will help solve the impasse between government and the mining sector,” said Kaizer Nyatsumba, the CEO of the Steel and Engineering Industries Federation of Southern Africa. Mantashe’s predecessor Mosebenzi Zwane clashed with mining companies over the controversial Mining Charter, which was expected to hurt the sector and create a policy uncertainty. Ramaphosa recently suspended court action to review the merits and legality of the charter, instead opting to consult with mining companies, labour, and communities, to resolve the impasse. Peter Leon, the co-chair and partner of Herbert Smith Freehills, urged Mantashe to make policy certainty his key and urgent priority. Other welcomed cabinet changes include the appointment of former ANC treasurer Zweli Mkhize as co-operative government minister, Lindiwe Sisulu as international relations minister, and Naledi Pandor as higher education minister.