South Africa’s African National Congress party leader Cyril Ramaphosa said on Wednesday he is holding direct talks with President Jacob Zuma over a transition and matters relating to Zuma’s position as president of the country. Zuma, in power since 2009 and beset by corruption allegations, has been in a weakened position since Deputy President Ramaphosa replaced him as ANC leader in December. Ramaphosa has talked of a transition of power since he took over as leader of the ANC. In a statement, Ramaphosa said he and Zuma hoped to conclude their discussions and report back to country “in coming days”, adding the process was an opportunity to conclude the matter without causing discord or division in the country. For more, see tweets below: Fellow South Africans, there has been a lot of speculation and anxiety about the position of President Jacob Zuma as the head of state and government of our country. I would like to clarify some matters in this regard. — Cyril Ramaphosa (@CyrilRamaphosa) February 7, 2018  Last night, President Zuma and I began direct discussions on the transition and matters relating to his position as the President of the Republic. The discussions were constructive & lay the basis for a speedy resolution of the matter in the interests of the country & its people. — Cyril Ramaphosa (@CyrilRamaphosa) February 7, 2018  On the basis of the progress made, it was agreed to postpone a special meeting of the #ANCNEC that had been scheduled for later today. This will enable President Zuma and myself to conclude our discussions and report back to our organisation and the country in the coming days. — Cyril Ramaphosa (@CyrilRamaphosa) February 7, 2018  I am aware that the uncertainty surrounding the position of the Head of State and Government is a cause for concern among many South Africans. This is understandable. — Cyril Ramaphosa (@CyrilRamaphosa) February 7, 2018  However, I am certain that the process we have now embarked on will achieve an outcome that not only addresses these concerns, but also unites our people around the tasks that all of us must necessarily undertake to build our country. — Cyril Ramaphosa (@CyrilRamaphosa) February 7, 2018  We will be able to communicate further on President Zuma’s position as President of the Republic once we have finalised all pertinent matters. — Cyril Ramaphosa (@CyrilRamaphosa) February 7, 2018  While the current situation has necessitated the postponement until further notice of the State of the Nation Address, the work of government and Parliament will continue. — Cyril Ramaphosa (@CyrilRamaphosa) February 7, 2018  This is a challenging time for our country. Both President Zuma and myself are aware that our people want and deserve closure. The constructive process we have embarked on offers the greatest opportunity to conclude this matter without discord or division. — Cyril Ramaphosa (@CyrilRamaphosa) February 7, 2018  Throughout this process, I am guided by the principle that the interests and needs of the South African people are paramount. — Cyril Ramaphosa (@CyrilRamaphosa) February 7, 2018 