Love can be a costly affair, especially for those spending and sharing it with loved ones on Valentine’s Day. However, gifting businesses don’t necessarily feel the burden as Valentine’s Day gives their business a much-needed boost. Florists, confectionaries and restaurants see this as a bonus on their financial calendar. Buyers making last-minute purchases are almost always willing to pay the price as Valentine’s Day is associated with flowers and gift giving. And many businesses are profiting from this, as their stores are even forced to expand their capacity in order to generate sales. Interflora, a popular online florist in South Africa, is one of these businesses. Alex Morse, the marketing manager of Interflora, told Moneyweb that Valentine’s Day and Mother’s Day rank among the  busiest business days. In recent years, Interflora has had to employ additional staff members to deal with the high call volumes and website requests, Morse said. Preparation for Valentine’s Day, which usually takes three months, goes mostly towards marketing Interflora’s offering, she added. Flower businesses profit more from red roses, which are more expensive than any other type of flowers. “There are only so many red roses that can be grown and the demand is high… [When there is] more demand [coupled with] less supply, then prices will go up,” said Morse. Morse said for some florists, sales achieved during Valentine’s Day equals what most florists generate in a month. NetFlorist, an online florist, has also attested to the popularity of the day. Eden Lurie, public relations executive for Netflorist, said it received a record 9 400 orders on February 12 – two days before Valentine’s Day. Lurie said NetFlorist has sold 192 550 red rose stems, 8 000 cerise roses, and 9 600 white roses since January 2018. Its best-selling flowers were red roses wrapped in craft paper. In order to fulfill the delivery of flowers during the busy Valentine’s Day period, Lurie said NetFlorist has also employed an additional 3 060 trained drivers nationwide. Research from Statistics SA indicates that buying flowers and jewelry may be the cheaper gifting option for loved ones compared with fine dining and romantic getaways. According to the research, the cost of dining at restaurants increased by 5.9% in December 2017 compared with December 2016 meanwhile the average price of a 150g chocolate advanced by 2.8% over the same period. Source: Stats SA Although flowers may be the traditional Valentine’s Day gift, they may be losing their sparkle and popularity among gift givers. The “Mastercard Love index”, which monitored credit, debit and prepaid transactions between 2015 and 2017, indicated that money spent on traditional gifts such as flowers decreased by 25% in 2017 compared with 2015. Also, the number of transactions for flower purchases decreased by 21% in 2017.  On the other hand, dining and romantic getaways still remain the most popular for Valentine’s Day.