The latest unit trust statistics from the Association for Savings and Investment South Africa (Asisa) appear to show that South African investors are more risk averse than those in the rest of the world. Local investors by far prefer using multi-asset funds, whereas the rest of the world makes far greater use of equity portfolios. Source: Asisa This move into multi-asset, or balanced, funds in South Africa has been pronounced over the last ten years. At the end of 2007, only 25% of money in locally-registered collective investment schemes was in these kinds of portfolios, but they have attracted by far the majority of inflows since then. Conventional thinking would suggest that this means that South African investors are giving up some of their returns. Equity funds should deliver the best performance of any category over the long term, and therefore investors using multi-asset funds are going to end up worse off. There are however two reasons why this argument is not as clear cut as it may seem. The first is that 10 years ago the most popular funds amongst South African investors were fixed interest portfolios. At December 31 2007, 41% of money held in collective investment schemes was in this category. Local investors have therefore, on average, been moving up the risk spectrum rather than down it. This suggests that they have actually been improving their prospects for better long-term returns. The second point is that, contrary to what one might expect, multi-asset high-equity funds have on average delivered better returns than equity funds over every meaningful time period. In other words, South African investors have not necessarily been giving up any returns by taking less risk. Source: Asisa and Profile Media There are two important points to make about this data. The first is that there are only a few funds with track records stretching back 20 years, so the figures for the longest time period are perhaps statistically questionable. The five- and ten-year returns are nevertheless telling. In addition, these are average returns. This means that investors in different funds may have had very different experiences. The difference between the top-performing equity fund and the worst-performing equity fund over the past decade, for instance, is 10% per year. When that is compounded, an investor in the top fund is almost three times better off than one in the bottom fund. It’s also worth noting the average funds in both categories have underperformed both the FTSE/JSE All Share Index and the FTSE/JSE Mid Cap Index by quite a margin over each of the longer periods. An investor in an index-tracking fund would therefore have been a lot better off than the averages shown above. The top-performing funds in their respective categories, however, would have outperformed the All Share Index in all cases. The tables below show the detail of relative performance against the two benchmarks. Source: Morningstar Source: Morningstar Source: Morningstar Just looking at the 20-year numbers, it is significant that over this longest time frame the top multi-asset high-equity fund – the Investec Opportunity Fund – showed a better return than the top general equity fund – the Nedgroup Investments Value Fund. It also outperformed both the All Share and Mid Cap Indices. Similarly, the bottom balanced fund outperformed the bottom equity fund by a sizeable margin. These portfolios did, however, lag the benchmarks by some way. While it is important to be clear that past performance is no indication of what will happen in the future, this does suggest that South African investors are being pretty astute by using multi-asset funds. While they may well be more risk-averse, this doesn’t mean that they are giving up performance. It’s also significant that over every time period the range between the top and bottom multi-asset high-equity fund is narrower than that between the top and bottom equity fund. Investors in this category are therefore also reducing their margin for error – the risk of picking the wrong manager. Finally, it’s worth noting that while the top-performing managers always managed to beat the All Share Index, the margin becomes smaller over longer time periods. It is also not the same managers that are delivering this outperformance every time. In fact, there isn’t a single manager who outperformed the All Share Index over all three periods under review. As there are only a handful of funds with 20 year track records, this isn’t an entirely fair comparison, yet even if one excludes the longest time frame the figures are significant. Only eight of 62 general equity funds and one of 45 multi-asset high-equity funds outperformed the All Share Index over both five and ten years. So not only would investors in index-tracking products have been significantly better off than those in the average fund, but they would have also seen far more consistent performance. There’s a lot to be said for that.