Investment decision making is a daunting task. Many people like you and I end up making unknown blunders as we do what we can to navigate the financial landscape. This is especially true for investments that have long time horizons, like retirement planning. Small mistakes today could lead to significant shortfalls at retirement age. Markets are complicated enough without asset managers and advisors making their work harder to understand. The above paragraph is true for many of us, but it is not true for all. Some asset managers do manage their funds as they say they will. Some advisors do a good job at finding appropriate investments for their clients. Some clients successfully use this advice and these investments to become more comfortable than they were in the past. Whether this is a result of luck or skill is a very important question to ask as an individual investor. If you may as well roll a dice when seeking fair treatment and good returns, then you should! There would be no point wasting time on expensive meetings and high fees if you didn’t need them. Ahead are three pointers to help you find funds that are managed with your best interests at heart. Investments vs products When it comes to choosing a retirement annuity, my first suggestion can help separate much of the wheat from the chaff. Keeping this point at the forefront of your mind when research retirement plans is a good idea. Retirement annuities are presented in two ways when marketed to the public. The first way, which I would avoid like the plague, is as ‘structured products’ or ‘solutions’. The second way, which I would run towards like a long-lost lover, is as an investment. The facts are that an individual is seeking to buy financial assets and secure a return that will benefit them at their retirement date. Why over-complicate the naming of this process any further? Bolted-on bells and whistles increase the possibility for confusion and loss. Keep it simple! Find a retirement annuity that calls itself an investment (or, at least, nothing further down the spectrum than a plan). Above all, be wary of those who would seek to add ‘features’ to their offering. These are likely to hinder, more than help, your investment progress in the long term. Performance pipe-dreams in the wild A second pointer that you may consider is whether the retirement annuity might be a little too good to be true. Examine whether the claims backed up by real-world performance track-record. Also, make a note of how easy it is to find full performance and fee disclosures. A great example of a company falling short of this behaviour is Easy Equities.  The company has begun marketing a retirement annuity ‘solution’,claiming various interesting characteristics. One of these is ‘Tax free retirement savings’, a phrase which may be misleading to some. While retirement annuities aren’t subject to taxes as they grow, they can only defer income tax, at best. Retirement annuities are all taxed on the future date when they mature. Their other distinguishing claims are all generic and vague, and include ‘Transparent and cheap’. This is ironically situated next to a panel indicating some costs are, in fact, hidden. These include fees and commissions not shown in the marketing summary of their product. Easy Equity’s retirement annuities are built from three underlying funds. These funds are all managed by Emperor Asset Management. The funds appear to be less than two months old, at the time of writing. Despite this, the companies have taken it upon themselves to make up a 13-year performance history. Anyone can look back in time and create an investment strategy that would pay off well in hindsight. Further, this theoretical fund performance is not separately disclosed from actual performance. Indeed, Emperors have been very kind on themselves. Their imagined performance over the last five years is greater than that of any (real) retirement annuity. Additionally, the stated management fee is only a ‘targeted fee’. It may or may not be the fee actually charged in reality.  It seems that the factsheets presented for the Emperor funds do not claim to constitute Minimum Disclosure Documents. While they have the appearance of such documentation, they do not conform to standards that consumers are accustomed to being protected by. I imagine a potential investor could enquire for the standarised documentation. That being said, the immediate absence of suitable disclosures and disclaimers does not paint the offering in a good light. Always Look a Gift Horse in the Mouth Ideally, claims made about investments should not just be true and accurate, but also independently verifiable. An example of the importance of this is found through 10X Investments. The company sells retirement annuity products and not retirement annuity investments. They also report back-projected performance figures, although this is disclosed with greater clarity. It is interesting to note that their main retirement annuity fund has underperformed its benchmark. This is despite all their claims that their fees won’t damage an investor’s excess returns. They’re embarrassed enough to leave the investor to calculate the underperformance themselves. This contrasts with most other funds who report underperformance on an equal footing with overperformance. The following image, taken from their website, indicates two claims. Firstly, that the industry standard for RA fees in South Africa is 3%. Secondly, that an investment with a competitor, and the qualities described, would earn 40% less than if invested with 10X. The source of their research is themselves, which is a potential first sign that something is amiss.  The first claim is technically easy, though a bit mundane, to verify. FundsData Online is a source for daily fund pricing and news across the local market spectrum. From their database, it is possible to assemble a list of retirement annuity funds. One can then calculate their average fee. The average fee charged by the 417 retirement annuity funds considered by the author was a startling 1.61%. This is almost half what 10X Investments claim it is. The fees charge by the ten most popular funds is lower still, averaging only 1.31%! Only five funds were found to charge fees of 3% or more each year. As a result, the graphs in the previous image have become quite misleading. The base case in their scenario is growth to about R6.9 million, without a fee attached to it. If you include the 10X fee of 1% plus VAT, the growth tops out at R5.0 million – true to their graph, but which is already a loss of 27%. Finally, if you include the industry standard fee of 1.61% plus VAT, the total growth you could expect is R4.2 million. This is only a 17% reduction when compared against 10X – not 40%, as they have claimed. You’ve been misled by fee-avoiders The aim here is provide an example of the importance of independent verification. In fact, the truth behind the fees debate is not widely recognized at all. An excessive example should serve to illustrate a point a bit better. Consider two retirement annuity funds, called Fund A and Fund B. Fund A presents a net 10% growth per year, but levies a fee of 1% for doing so. Fund B also reports having earned 10% per annum after fees, but charges a 5% fee to the investor for this work. Which fund is the better fund? They are the same! The investor in any unit trust or retirement annuity only ever sees the after-fees performance of their investment. This is the only money that they can call theirs, no matter what the size of the fee is. This brings me to my third point: The increased weight of decision-making placed on unit trust and retirement annuity fees in recent years need not be as great as it is. Don’t hear what I’m not saying. Fees on other investment vehicles, and financial advisor fees, are definitely worth keeping small. Further, fees on any ‘product’ offerings are to be avoided or minimised, too. You may wish to prefer a fund manager who is not over-enriching themselves with high fees. But, avoiding high fees does not make you any richer if after-fee performance is equal. What hope is there, then? There is great difficulty in navigating the retirement annuity landscape. This is especially true for investors who are not on the look-out for opportunists. In summary, seeking asset managers with good, long-term track record, based on real-world performance, is an excellent place to start. So is seeking out firms that offer investments as opposed to ‘structured products’ or ‘solutions’. Favouring these qualities can put you ahead of the pack with little effort. Challenge your advisor to find firms who comply with the Global Investment Performance Standards, or GIPS. These are a globally recognised standard for presenting investment performance. They encourage reporting that is fair, accurate, and comparable with other firms. If presented with a deal that is too good to be true, it probably is. Financial analysis is a specialised profession, part science and part art. It will never be done well if it is done for free. Fees are here to stay. Seeking out genuinely low fees may lead you to less greedy fund managers. At the end of the day, the after-fee, or net-of-fees, performance of your investment is your bottom line. Grant Maxwell is not a financial advisor, and the above does not constitute, and may not be construed to constitute, financial advice.