RYK VAN NIEKERK: On the line from London is John Ashbourne, he is the Africa economist at Capital Economics. John, thank you for your time, we’ve seen the resignation of Jacob Zuma on Wednesday night, how do you think it will impact South Africa? JOHN ASHBOURNE: In the short term the news has obviously been very much welcomed by the financial markets, in South Africa the rand has strengthened, the…has opened about 3% higher on Thursday than it was on Wednesday, so it’s really added to some positive sentiment. The question, of course, now is what this means over the longer term and that’s still very much unclear. 
Mr Ramaphosa has been acting president now for less than 12 hours but the speculation is that things will begin to change. RYK VAN NIEKERK: What do you think should be at the top of Mr Ramaphosa’s agenda to try and keep this momentum? JOHN ASHBOURNE: In some ways he’s unlucky and lucky, on the positive side Mr Ramaphosa is coming to office at a time when the South African economy is probably looking stronger than it has for several years. The figures that we had on Wednesday, for example, from retail sales for December do suggest that the economy was already strengthening in 2017, so he has some momentum behind him but he doesn’t, as you say, have much time to consolidate that. We hear that Mr Ramaphosa is going to be giving the State of the Nation Address (Sona) on Friday and then the budget is scheduled for next week and that is going to be very, very closely watched by investors and analysts because that will be the first sign of really what a Ramaphosa presidency means. The big task there is going to be sending a signal that fiscal management is going to be improved and particularly a signal must be received by the ratings agencies because there is a significant risk that South Africa loses its last investment grade rating if there isn’t a sign that things are beginning to improve. So that’s a really big test and that’s happening in week one. No quick fix for SA’s fiscal position RYK VAN NIEKERK: But is it not unfair to expect that from him, especially the fiscal position South Africa finds itself in, it cannot be solved in the short term? JOHN ASHBOURNE: That’s absolutely correct, I don’t think anything is going to be different on day one than it was just before but I think what people will be looking for is a sense of focus and not a detailed plan perhaps but at least a direction of travel that things will change, that there’s an admission that there has to be a change in outlook. But, as you say, these are all, as indeed all of South Africa’s economic problems are, very, very structural, these are huge inherited problems that can’t be wished away with good intentions but the good intentions would at least be a starting point and that would be welcomed. RYK VAN NIEKERK: That seems to be the perception but South Africa has disappeared off many international investors’ radars because of negative perceptions around government, pre-Mr Ramaphosa, how quickly do you think those perceptions can change? JOHN ASHBOURNE: It will take a bit of time, to be honest, but I think that Mr Ramaphosa has made some progress already, even just his performance at Davos was welcomed by a lot of people and I know these are just presentational things, obviously the real hard work is yet to be done but I think he is making an effort to change perceptions that really were very, very negative. It is to some extent fortunate for South Africa that a lot of those impressions were very centred personally on Mr Zuma, so a lot of analysts and investors really blamed a great deal on the previous president and so I think it will be possible for Ramaphosa to make an effort to explain that things are going to be quite different now, even though obviously most people in the government are the same, the same party is in charge and structural issues are not going away, I think there will still be a sense that change has come. RYK VAN NIEKERK: As you said, Mr Ramaphosa has been in the job for only a few hours and the current debate amongst journalists in South Africa is who will deliver the budget next week. Obviously there is a cabinet appointed by Zuma who are still in place and there could be significant changes, who would you like to see deliver that budget? JOHN ASHBOURNE: Obviously that’s a critical decision for the new president, I think someone other than Malusi Gigaba would be welcomed by financial markets and I think by a lot of analysts. Who that person is, whether it’s Gordhan again or Jonas has been talked about, I think that’s a role where a lot of people would like to see a changeover in and that is not really for me to say. I think, as you stress, there’s not very much time to make this change, get a new person in office and then have them write or rewrite a budget. So that’s going to be a pretty big challenge for a short period of time. RYK VAN NIEKERK: Thank you, John. That was John Ashbourne, he is the Africa economist at Capital Economics.