Here’s what caught our attention on Thursday The new Eskom board, headed by board chairperson Jabu Mabuza, has indicated that it has the funds to make a R10 billion payment to its creditors on Thursday. The funding comes from funders and isn’t from the utility’s account, per se. Eskom announced on Tuesday that it has R367 billion in debt.  Multichoice has apologised for getting involved with Gupta-owned news channel ANN7, after reports emerged of it making payments to the station. An internal probe however dismisses this claim. Multichoice has decided that it will not renew ANN7’s contract in a bid to clear its own name and give an opportunity to a black-owned media outlet with no political interference.  The rand gained on Wednesday, after ANC party officials said they were working towards a faster leadership transition of the ruling party. Since the ANC’s national elective conference in December, and Cyril Ramaphosa’s election as ANC president, wheels have turned in SA. The rand gained and party members are working hard to paint a better picture for South Africans. Bloomberg reported that the party is due to discuss this with the president in the coming days.  The collapse of the embattled retailer was discussed in front of Parliament’s Standing Committee on Finance, the Standing Committee on Public Accounts, and the Standing Committee on Appropriations. The man heading the briefing, Yunus Carrim, told Steinhoff board members, regulators and the Financial Services Board that the matter is not being dealt with properly, or is not being taken seriously. On Wednesday, the board members reported Steinhoff’s former CEO, Markus Jooste to the Hawks.  Fitch Ratings downgraded Eskom’s long-term local currency issuer default rating (IDR) and unguaranteed local currency senior unsecured ratings to ‘BB-‘ from of ‘BB+’ on Wednesday. The rating agency attributed this to Eskom’s liquidity and the “company’s uncertain capacity to fulfil its short-term financial commitments”. The Eskom board, however, is confident in its turnaround strategy to regain its stability.