At the end of its 2017 financial year liquor conglomerate Distell had four clear priorities: Grow and win in SA, expand in Africa, expand in one major international market and leverage its core portfolio. Success at these tasks would result in the company doubling its growth and earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortization (R2.8 billion at the time) by 2021. Six months later Distell has made strides in each area, but the earnings target is looking elusive. “The lower growth in South Africa makes it more challenging to achieve the goal above,” says CEO Richard Rushton. “However, the lower growth in SA could be offset by our 26% holding in [African spirit company] Best Global Brands. We have an agreement in place to buy the remaining 74% and we want to build that brand aggressively across Africa. Our target will be difficult to achieve without some or other inorganic activity.” Rushton was talking following the presentation of interim results for the six months to December. Distell reported growth in volumes and revenue in all of its core markets. This was in marked contrast to the previous six and 12-month periods where volumes and revenue growth were disappointing.  1H2018 FY2017 1H2017  VOLUME REVENUE VOL REV VOL REV SA 2.9% 8.2% 1.5% 7.8% -1.1% 5.1% Africa 6.6% 18% -5.2% -0.1% -12.8% -8.0% International 6% 7.7% 3.6% -12.1% 0.9% -1.3% Source: Distell results presentations As a result of higher volumes sold, group revenue grew by 9.3% to R13.4 billion in the six month period. In South Africa, which accounts for 75% of revenue, Distell’s spirits and ready-to-drink portfolios grew strongly, while the wine portfolio benefitted from consumers trading-up from mainstream brands. The brandy category has finally succeeded in warding off the threat from whisky and grew volumes by 14%. Last year Distell rationalized its premium wine category, selling its stakes in La Bonheur and Stellenzicht wine farms and brands, and focusing on four key brands (which it owns outright) Nederburg, Fleur du Cap, Alto and Durbanville Hills. The same push to balance the group’s portfolio better to improve margin and return on investment saw it selling its cognac business Bisquit in December last year. The sale of the brand saw a reduction in net debt, and will see an improved (over the full year) return on assets. This will ultimately increase Distell group ROIC by 0.5%. Africa’s good growth figures were largely driven by the inclusion of KHEAL in Kenya which was acquired in April 2017. Focus markets such as Namibia, Botswana, Kenya, Zambia and Zimbabwe all recorded strong growth, with Nederburg enjoying high double-digit growth across most of these key countries, and the early success of JC Le Roux and Amarula gaining traction in Angola. However the overall performance was negatively impacted by challenging trading conditions in Mozambique, Nigeria and a once-off R89.5 million hit from the Group’s associate Tanzania Distilleries. Distell’s performance in markets beyond Africa was boosted by increased investment in the UK, growth of Amarula in its top five markets and growth in export wine sales in 17 markets. Normalised operating profit increased by 6.5%. If forex movements are excluded, normalised operating profit increased by 4.4%. Additional normalised Ebitda of 3.5% was achieved through acquisitions mentioned. Headline earnings decreased by 5.1% to R1.1 billion and headline earnings per share decreased by 5.1% to 509.2 cents, however headline earnings increased by 3.2% when excluding foreign exchange movements, the reversal of the Amarula interest accrual reversal in the prior year and the R89.5 million in losses from its associate investment, Tanzania Distilleries. “We are seeing the benefits of focus. However we are now at the beginning of our scaling up for excellence journey,” says Rushton. “We sold off our less productive wine farms, cognac business Bisquit and an unproductive production facility. There will be other opportunities to optimize our production and distribution network. This is where hard work will be in next 18 months. The focus is on improving our asset utilization, to get our cost base down. Our margins are still too low relative to our peer group.” The finalisation of the restructuring of Distell’s shareholder structure is expected to occur in April 2018 once all regulatory approvals have been granted and this will result in the relisting of its shares and an increase in free-float.