Finance minister Malusi Gigaba did not thank taxpayers for paying their taxes in his official budget speech. It may not seem to be a big deal, but in the context of the extensive tax increases as a result of corruption and mismanagement, it seems to be a case of k@k en betaal is die wet van Transvaal. But be that as it may, with Gigaba at the helm, it always was a budget about integrity and credibility. This was abundantly clear at a press conference held during the traditional lock-up session, where journalists get access to the budget before the tabling of the speech in parliament. Sitting in front of a very large media contingent, Gigaba and his team, which included Sars commissioner Tom Moyane, valiantly tried to convey a message that it is a “good budget”, where difficult decisions were taken. Gigaba also said on numerous occasions that the renewed optimism in the country will lead to increased economic growth, and that this will in turn lead to a fiscal recovery. However, during the lengthy Q&A session, virtually all journalists attacked Gigaba and Moyane’s integrity and fitness to hold office. This was of course due to the perception that they were deployed to their positions by former president Jacob Zuma to facilitate state capture. Gigaba seemed prepared for these questions and responded with outright denial to allegations of wrongdoing. “I serve at the pleasure of the president,” he said in answer to questions on whether he will remain finance minister for the foreseeable future. Details Looking at the printed details of the budget, Gigaba may be correct that South Africa’s finances are still okay. The 2018 tax year will see a budget deficit of 4.3% of GDP or R204 billion. This is expected to decline to 3.6% of GDP or R180 billion in 2019. Total debt will be around R2.5 trillion at the end of March, or 53.3% of GDP. This ratio is expected to remain relatively stable for the next three years, contrary to previous predictions that it would hit 60% in a few years. Read: The come-hither budget All of these indicators are high, but given the context of South Africa’s current economic situation it will be a good result if it can be achieved. The question remains whether these printed targets are achievable. It will take significant political will and unpopular decisions to achieve and, from the mood of the press conference, it seems clear that there is a perception that this will not happen under Gigaba. It is also apparent that an improvement in our fiscal position is directly linked to accelerated economic growth. There is absolutely no wriggle room for future financial engineering to address structural issues in the budget and economy. VAT hike is Zuma’s legacy The 2018 budget will however be remembered as the one where VAT hit 15%, the first increase since its introduction in 1993. It is a direct consequence of the damage the Zuma administration inflicted on the economy, and all South Africans will have to pay cash for the consequences of his and his administration’s poor and corrupt leadership. This VAT hike follows a significant decline in tax morality. This trend needs to change to achieve the budget goals for the next few years, but it will be extremely tough to reverse under Gigaba and Moyane. A different message A key question is whether the budget would have had a different message if someone else tabled it in Parliament. A lot of speculation preceded the budget that Ramaphosa would sack Gigaba and appoint a credible minister to remove integrity concerns. This could have boosted the already-bourgeoning confidence levels that followed Ramaphosa’s election as ANC leader and his inspiring State of the Nation Address, even more. Read: Sacking of Gigaba the first step to repair a broken SA Time will tell whether Ramaphosa missed a trick or whether it was another excellent strategic decision. The answer may be with the imminent cabinet reshuffle, which may be announced as soon as Thursday. 