With a budget shortfall of R50 billion and government juggling numbers to find R40 billion for free tertiary education, compounded by the economy only growing at an uneasy 1%, the finance ministry will need to resort to tax increases to try and balance the books, without increasing government debt. Read: ‘Least bad’ option for SA is VAT hike For the first time since 1993, there is a likelihood of a VAT increase and speculation is that it could even move up to 16%. For every 1% increase in the VAT rate, the fiscus should see tax collection increase by R22 billion. A 2% increase could cover most of the gap of the R50 billion shortfall. VAT is one of the most efficient forms of tax collection and is broad-based, also capturing most forms of consumption as well as including some revenues earned in the informal sector. Any impact in the lower LSMs can be countered with support in the grants system and potentially zero-rating more basic needs on food items and other necessities. For SME owners, it would mean a flow-through of price increases of up to 2% to the customer, which can have a negative impact on demand. What is likely to counter this drag on demand, is the cautious optimism experienced since the election of Cyril Ramaphosa as the ANC President. There is a visibly more positive sentiment in the SME market with businesses beginning to reinvest for growth. They are also open to taking funding to buy more stock, expand their premises and open new locations. If government can contain and reduce expenditure, particularly by the public sector wage bill, and the GDP growth rate accelerates with the positive sentiment and investment, we could potentially even look forward to credit rating upgrades, reducing the cost of financing our debt and ultimately balancing the books and reducing government debt. Read: Fiscal consolidation crucial in the upcoming budget – Busa This would also have a knock-on effect in the international market with a strengthening rand reducing import costs. A stronger rand and lower interest rates will be the boost that SMEs need to flourish and ultimately create jobs as they expand. Karl Westwig is CEO of Retail Capital.