Here’s what caught our attention on Wednesday: 1. South Africa PMI South Africa’s Purchasing Manager’s Index (PMI) for June is expected on Wednesday. In May, PMI fell to 50.0, from 50.4 in April, data from Trading Economics shows. Absa’s PMI, released on Monday, fell to 47.9, the biggest drop three months. Update to follow. 2. Glencore falls after being subpoenaed for corruption Swiss-based mining and trading company, Glencore, made headlines for the wrong reasons on Tuesday. The company is being subpoenaed by the US Department of Justice (DoJ), for alleged involvement in money laundering and corruption. The DoJ is demanding documents from Glencore relating to its operations in the Democratic Republic of Congo, Nigeria and Venezuela from 2007 to date. The company’s shares tumbled as much as 13% after the news of the subpoena emerged. Glencore says it is reviewing the subpoena and will provide further information in due course, Bloomberg reported. 3. Sassa takes legal action against Grindrod Bank The South African Social Security Agency (Sassa), which is responsible for the distribution of social grants, is taking Grindrod Bank, a partner of Net1, to court over its decision to increase bank charges by more than 40% for social grant beneficiaries. Moneyweb is reporting that Grindrod Bank increased its fixed monthly bank charges from R6.91 to R10 from April 1 for the 5.2 million social grant beneficiaries. The increase comes despite an agreement with Sassa to keep a fee of R6.91 on March 5. 4. Eskom to consider debt extensions Power utility Eskom, which is facing more than R62 billion due in principle debt payments in the next five years, is considering asking for extensions on some debt as well as staff layoffs. Eskom is financially troubled, and according to Bloomberg, has burnt through about R40 billion a year since 2013. Eskom, which depends on the government to service its R368 billion of debt, is evaluating a liability management strategy, as it seeks to implement a turnaround plan. 5. Sasol to strike over black employees’ scheme Senior employees have asked trade union Solidarity to strike at energy giant, Sasol, over the company’s plan to launch a share ownership scheme, which is exclusively for black staff. Reuters is reporting that members of the union received the mandate from its senior representatives and will start the process to go on a strike.