Johnson & Johnson recorded 20% growth in its drug unit in the second quarter, but the company is trimming its forecast for the year as a strong dollar hampers its growth. The US medical conglomerate said in a statement Tuesday that it was cutting its full-year revenue projection to $80.5 billion to $81.3 billion, from $81 billion to $81.8 billion, and narrowing its adjusted earnings forecast. The shares were up 0.6% to $125.40 in trading before the markets opened in New York, reversing earlier losses. J&J is based in New Brunswick, New Jersey, but generates about half its sales overseas. It’s one of the first major US multinationals to report earnings after President Donald Trump began implementing a round of tariffs and threatening others, which has rattled markets. Those changes in the markets appear to have affected J&J. Three months ago, the company said exchange rates would give it a 4.2% boost to sales; this quarter it cut that estimate to 1.9%. Currency trends could weigh on other large drugmakers as well, said Vamil Divan, an analyst with Credit Suisse Group AG. “This was a key driver of the company lowering full-year sales guidance and sets a potentially cautious tone for earnings season for the US pharma space, especially those with greater ex-US exposure,” Divan said in a note. Since April 16, the day before J&J’s last quarterly report, the US dollar is up 5.4% against a basket of 10 major global currencies. Trade and monetary policy tensions between nations can have a stark impact on currency markets. Source:Bloomberg J&J Chief Financial Officer Joseph Wolk, who took over the role this month, said the company hadn’t been hurt by specific tariffs — although products in its consumer unit are most vulnerable. “It’s really not attributable to the trade war at all,” Wolk said. “It’s simply the macro effect of a stronger dollar.” The currency shifts have also affected J&J’s drug unit, which has grown quickly through deals and new products to become the company’s biggest. The unit’s benefit from exchange rates fell to 2.3% in the second quarter, compared to 4.3% in the prior period. Wolk also said the company will continue to defend itself in the legal saga surrounding its talc products. Last week, a jury ordered the company to pay $4.69 billion to women who claimed asbestos in the products caused them to develop ovarian cancer, the six-largest product defect verdict in US history. Read: J&J jury awards $4.14bn punitive damages over talc cancer “We believe the science is overwhelmingly on our side,” Wolk said. The company has said it will appeal the judgment.