Here’s what caught our attention on Tuesday: 1. Steinhoff made purchases in forestry, investigation shows More scandal unveils in the Steinhoff saga. This time a probe by PwC into the company financials shows that a company linked to the executives of Steinhoff purchased forestry plantations in South Africa and later sold it to Steinhoff at five times more than the value of the original. Bloomberg is reporting that the documents are dated as far back as 2015. Steinhoff is awaiting results from PwC and declined to comment on the matter. 2. Metrofile makes changes to board Metrofile announced two new appointments on Tuesday. Phumzile Langeni has been appointed as lead independent director with immediate effect, and Zaheer Abdullah has been appointed as a non-executive director as of September 15 2018. Abdullah will be replacing Cynthia Pongweni, who will resign in September. 3. Sacci business confidence falls in June The South African Chamber of Commerce Index (Sacci) business confidence falls for the fifth month in a row in June. Business confidence fell to 93.7 index points from 94.0 in May. Reuters is reporting that the fall is mainly due to declines in currency and slow retail sales. 4. Sarb guarantees VBS deposits The South African Reserve Bank (Sarb), alongside National Treasury, has guaranteed R336 million in retail deposits at VBS Mutual Bank, at R100 000 per depositor. According to Moneyweb, total retail deposits with the bank are at about R370 million, therefore 97% of the bank’s 22 700 retail deposits will receive all their money. VBS Mutual Bank was placed under curatorship in March 2018, after facing a liquidity crisis, and management was found to have stolen the bank’s assets. 5. Hospitality Property Fund acquires Tsogo Sun hotels Hospitality Property Fund, a South African property fund announced on Monday that it has acquired seven casino and hotel businesses from luxury hotel and casino management company, Tsogo Sun. According to Reuters, the transaction was completed in shares and subscription agreement worth R23 billion. Hospitality Property Fund says that the transaction is aimed at broadening its earnings base, and Tsogo Sun said on its end, it is in line with plans to restructure into three separately listed operating divisions.