The latest sales updates from SA’s retailers show that all is not well in the industry. Retail giants regarded as recession-proof, including Shoprite and Woolworths, are feeling the heat from SA’s stalling economy, cash-strapped consumers, and increasingly uncertain economic times. “There is pressure on disposable income, lack of confidence in terms of borrowing, cost of living is up with increases in taxes and petrol price increases,” Ron Klipin, a senior analyst at Cratos Capital, tells Moneyweb. “On the other hand, you have intense competition among retailers as they are trying to increase sales by cutting prices.” Reflecting these challenges are sales updates from Woolworths, Shoprite, and Massmart this week as consumer spending – a vital part of the economy – is in the doldrums. Woolworths’s trading update for the year to June 24 shows that it’s battling to achieve any retail sales other than in its food division. The group’s overall sales grew by a meagre 1.6%, which took a bite from its profits. Woolworths expects its headline earnings per share to fall as much as 20% when it reports on its 2018 financial year on August 23. Woolworths finds itself stuck between “extremely challenging” trading conditions in SA and Australia, where its cash-guzzling David Jones business is in turnaround mode as it recently pencilled in a R7 billion impairment. Read: Woolworths faces write-down nightmare in Australia Its woes are also self-engineered. A poor product execution, especially in women’s fashion, resulted in customers turning against the retailer. This can be seen in its South African fashion, beauty and home division, which saw sales decline by 1.5% while sales volumes (excluding price inflation of 0.8%) fell by 2.3%. Its South African food division – Woolworths’s mainstay – grew sales by 8.4% and sales volumes after factoring in price inflation of 3.2% advanced by more than 5%. “In this economy, food is a priority for consumers, whilst clothing and homeware is a luxury, hence this could have been a catalyst for the food businesses recording strong sales growth,” says Cratos Capital’s Klipin. The Woolworths food business has to contend with the threat of Shoprite’s push into the upmarket consumer segment by using its Checkers business. Read: Shoprite eyes wallets of upmarket consumers “Checkers is slowly eating the lunch of Pick n Pay, Spar and Woolworths, as consumers are looking for value and buying down into Checkers than more expensive food at Woolworths,” he says. Checkers’s parent company, Shoprite Group is fighting its own battles. Hyperinflation in Angola took a bite of Shoprite’s sales, which increased by 3.3% to R145.6 billion for the year to June. Shoprite is usually praised for its ability to achieve double-digit sale increases and its reliance in tough times given its exposure to a wide consumer income base through its brands including Shoprite, Checkers, Usave, and others. But cracks are starting to show. Shoprite’s supermarkets in SA – its core business – grew sales by 5.7% with internal inflation dropping to 0.3% from 5.9% during the previous year. One analyst says when new store openings were excluded, sales volumes in SA for the supermarkets business would be less than 4%. “It shows that the business is starting to be hit by a tough economy and losing market share to peers such as Pick n Pay,” says the analyst. Wayne McCurrie, the senior portfolio manager at Ashburton Investments, says Shoprite’s supermarket sales are still showing decent growth. “The headline number is low because food inflation has fallen dramatically,” says McCurrie. Massmart – the operator of Game, Makro, Dion Wired and others – is also feeling the retail malaise. In what McCurrie describes as “very disappointing”, Massmart grew total sales by 1.9% for the 26 weeks to July 1 to R41.6 billion.