McDonald’s global growth continues at a steady clip, even as it feels the heat from fast-food rivals in the US. The company posted global same-store sales growth that topped analysts’ projections after fresh beef and a revamped discount menu drew customers. The chain also is adding delivery across the globe to bring food to customers increasingly looking for convenient meal options. Same-store sales rose 4% globally last quarter, compared with estimates of 3.6%. In the US, the key metric missed forecasts, rising 2.6%. “Overall, the numbers look solid,” said Edward Jones analyst Brian Yarbrough. “The one standout — the US was a little bit disappointing.” Shares swung between gains and losses in premarket trading Thursday, and were down less than 0.5% at 8:40 am in New York. The shares had fallen 7.7% this year through Wednesday’s close. McDonald’s has been on a mission to improve its burgers with the introduction earlier this year of fresh Quarter Pounder sandwiches across the US, where the chain has about 14 000 locations. Same-store sales growth fell domestically from first-quarter rates. Excluding some items, profit amounted to $1.99 a share in the quarter that ended June 30, compared with the $1.93 average of analysts’ estimates. Revenue was $5.35 billion, exceeding projections for $5.33 billion. The company said in June that it was reducing corporate headcount to further trim expenses, and that it would incur $80 million to $90 million in charges related to severance pay and the closing of field offices in the second quarter. The world’s biggest restaurant chain by sales has recently struggled to regain its footing during breakfast time, and has been pushing egg sandwiches and coffee to lure Americans. After introducing all-day breakfast in 2015, the company has refocused its efforts on the morning hours, when competition is particularly steep, Chief Executive Officer Steve Easterbrook said in April. Dunkin’ Donuts also offers breakfast sandwiches during all hours, and just introduced doughnut fries for $2. Starbucks, which has about the same number of US locations as McDonald’s, has been improving its food and trying to lock customers in with a growing rewards program. The Golden Arches is trying to improve its image among diners. Along with fresh beef, the chain is starting to phase out plastic straws in some European markets as concerns about consumer waste increase. The company said customer traffic was positive in all segments during the most recent quarter, except for in the US. That resulted in a global guest count decrease of 0.3%. Comparable sales in the company’s international lead segment that includes the UK and Germany gained 4.9%, beating the 4.1% analysts had expected. McDonald’s high-growth markets, including China and Italy, posted an increase of 2.4%, compared with projections for 2.5% growth. Strong demand in Italy helped this segment, while the company had “continued challenges in South Korea,” it said in a statement on Thursday.