I visited Mauritius to investigate the study options for foreign students and indeed found that there are some significant benefits. For anyone from Africa thinking about international study options, Mauritius may be an option to consider. The proximity to South Africa is an important consideration, my flight on SAA from Johannesburg to Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam International took under four hours which was very convenient. There are also direct flights on Air Mauritius from Cape Town and from other African countries such as Nairobi in Kenya. The cost of study varies from institution to institution, the exchange rate (currently 1 ZAR to 2.55 Mauritian Rupee (MUR) is very favourable. Read more on specific cost for study and accommodation below. Keep in mind the cost of flights.  Do your research on costs and check the exchange rate! I visited the two foremost universities in Mauritius namely, the University of Mauritius and Middlesex University (UK). University of Mauritius The University of Mauritius, established in 1965 is the national university of Mauritius. The campus is located in the heart of a modern business district called Réduit, a great position, 14km from the capital, Port Louis. The student population is just under 10 000 students and the University offers a good range of study options including, Engineering, Law, Science, Agriculture and Social Science. The campus has a lush garden environment which creates an open and relaxed feel. I met with the University Pro-Vice-Chancellor for Planning and Resources, Prof Mohammad Issack Santally and his assistant who showed me around the campus. He was keen to point out that the University is targeting students from South Africa and Africa and is wanting to significantly increase its international student enrolment. There are currently only 64 international students at the university but this number is growing; the reasons for this are: Prof. Santally explained that the government is investing in higher education in order to increase the number of foreign students studying in Mauritius. This will not only serve as a source of foreign revenue but will reduce the problem of “brain drain” by encouraging young Mauritians to study at home rather than to go abroad to study. Cost of study: One of the biggest competitive advantages to studying at the University of Mauritius is the cost of study. The average cost of tuition for a three year programme is approximately 250 000 MUR or R98 000! Accommodation and living costs combined are relatively good 9 500 MUR per month or R3 500 (about R42 000 per year). Middlesex University (Mauritius) Middlesex University is located in Vacoas located around 45 minutes drive from Port Louis and is one of the quieter parts of the island. If you are a surfer it is not too far from a well-known surf spot called Tamarin Bay which happens to be a location where many expats prefer to live. Middlesex University was recently recognised as one of the top 500 universities in the world, according to the Times Higher Education World University Rankings. One of the reasons for this recognition is the University’s international outlook because it has campuses in London, Malta, Dubai and Mauritius. The campus in Vacoas is has state of the art facilities and forms part of an education hub with a private school, gymnasium, sports grounds and a shopping complex. The shopping complex even has a Woollies. I met with the Head of Marketing for Middlesex Mauritius, Rakesh Ram who proudly showed me the view from the library overlooking the Indian Ocean in the distance: “Where in the world can you study a UK degree at such a price and with such a beautiful view?” he said smiling. I was impressed with the facilities especially the library, lecture halls, classrooms and computer facilities. The residences look fantastic from the outside although I did not get a chance to look inside. The programmes offered at the campus include bachelor degrees and master degrees, in IT, Law (LLB), Social Science, and Business. The business programmes include: accounting, finance and media. There are no medical or engineering programmes on offer except for Psychology offered under the Social Science Faculty and a Master’s degree in Midwifery. The only science programme on offer is a BSc in Computer Science. Rakesh said that one of the advantages of studying through Middlesex Mauritius is that you may transfer from Mauritius to either London, Dubai or Malta campuses. Before I left, Rakesh gave me a brochure for South African students, an indication of the Universities intent to attract South African students. Entry requirements:  For direct entry into first year of undergraduate programmes applicants should hold a South African National Senior Certificate with at least two subjects at level 6 (70-79%) and a five (substantial achievement 60-69%) for three subjects or more. Life orientation will not be considered. For the Foundation entry programme applicants should pass a minimum of 4 subjects have a minimum of an NSC with an achievement rating of four (adequate achievement, 50-59%). Cost of study at Middlesex Mauritius: The cost of a three year undergraduate degree is approximately 215000 MUR annum, approximately R84 00 per annum, which is competitive when considering the cost of public and private higher education in South Africa. Accommodation on-campus varies between 9 000 MUR and 12 000 MUR per month (approximately R3 500 – R4 600 per month). Stats on Mauritius: Benefits of Studying in Mauritius: Disadvantages: My impressions of Mauritius: I was impressed with Mauritius as a study destination especially as it is a small island country. The beauty of the island serves as an idyllic backdrop with its striking volcanic mountains, coral reefs and palm fringed beaches. Mauritius is a busy place, there are lots of people around and there are sharp contrasts between the poorer older parts and the more modern sophisticated developments.  For example, Ebene Cybercity is an impressive new information technology hub and is home to many international financial and IT businesses. I was surprised to see how many newly built shopping malls there are in Mauritius all housing familiar South African retail brands like Woolworths and Shoprite. The unemployment rate is relatively low when compared to other African countries (standing at 8%) and from all of the business activity and development taking place it appears that the country is attracting a lot of foreign investment especially from India and South Africa. The education sector is growing too and there is a clear intent on the part of government to promote Mauritius to South Africans and Africans in general whilst at the same time trying to reverse the brain-drain at home by investing in the Higher Education. Dennis Stead is the CEO of Pace Careers. This article was published with the permission of go study. The original publication can be viewed here.