A South African-based mining company with international operations was spending over R40 million a year flying its executives and technology specialists to all four corners of the globe. After six months of working with FCM Travel Solutions, the corporate travel arm of the Flight Centre Travel Group, the company saw its travel liability reduced by a fifth. This was not achieved by forcing employees to use discount airlines, cheap hotels or tin cars. Instead it is the result of FCM’s holistic approach to travel management. “The travel industry has historically been about transactions where the emphasis was on shaving a few rands off the cost of the flight, hotel or transfers,” says Lloyd Barkhuizen, FCM Travel Solutions’ head of sales for the Middle East and Africa. “We do not add value in this fashion. Instead we look beyond the transaction, at the bigger picture. For instance if our data reveals that a client is using 500 different hotels in 50 cities, we would advise reducing this number to say 100, and negotiate a discount with the remaining hotels. It is about creating efficiencies.” This approach would not be possible without the sophisticated and integrated technology systems that enable FCM to gather and crunch the massive amounts of information created every minute by its agents and corporate clients. This is the world of big data – and it’s transforming the travel industry and enabling those who harness it to get an edge on their peers. To be clear, let’s understand what big data is: Big data is a term used to describe the large volume of data that inundates a business on a daily basis. While the expression is quite new, the act of gathering and storing large amounts of information for eventual analysis is not. What is different now is the volume and speed at which information comes into an organisation, and the variety of formats it comes in – from structured numeric data in traditional databases to unstructured text documents, email, video, audio, credit card and other financial transactions. To understand the scale, consider that today Google receives 40 000 search queries every second and Facebook users send 31 million messages and view 2.77 million videos every minute. Yet less than 0.5% of all data is ever analysed, let alone interpreted and the findings used to improve a product or service. This means the companies that actively glean key insights from business information have a unique opportunity to differentiate themselves. In South Africa, the corporate travel market is worth an estimated R12 billion. Add government travel to that and it’s worth about R25 billion, says Barkhuizen. “There are thousands of small and large travel management companies that are aggressively going after that pie. In an attempt to secure a slice they will drop their service fee – sometimes to as low as 1%. This is not sustainable.” FCM will not enter into this type of price competition. Instead it differentiates itself by building partnerships with clients, understanding their business objectives and tailoring a travel strategy to that, he says. Enter big data. There are three specific ways that FCM uses its data analysis skills to add value to clients. Pricing strategies The days of unlimited business class trips and first class hotels are over for most companies, and the cost of business travel is something the accountants keep a wary eye on. “Rather than ‘going cheap’ we use our data analytics to index, track and analyse prices to gain a clear picture as to what’s trending,” says Barkhuizen. “Using real-time analytics, we can track changes in pricing and build an optimum pricing strategy for our clients.” First class service Increased regulatory and insurance requirements mean that companies need to know where their employees are all of the time and take proactive steps to ensure their safety and travel comfort. In the case of a large global beverage provider, FCM is able to alert the necessary security providers within a company when their executives are entering or leaving high-risk countries. “This requires our real-time planning and management system to be integrated with the risk management system,” says Barkhuizen. “All of the data appears, in real-time, on one dashboard that is also available to the client.” Insight into customer needs FCM uses big data to help it to identify patterns in consumer behaviour and understand the ongoing requests of its customer base to provide offerings that they may need in the future. “For instance, if you have a rainmaker in your organisation who travels 189 days of the year, you need to understand the toll this is taking on that person. After all, it will be cheaper to adapt your travel policy to suit their needs than it will be to replace that person.” Customised user experience The data aggregated from customers can be used to personalise various services –such as travel bookings – to make navigation easy. For instance, many companies now have four generations of people working under a collective roof who all have different needs. “A millennial wants to book via a smart device while an older person may want to liaise with a travel consultant,” says Barkhuizen. “These are tangible differences. If we measure them, crunch them and analyse them, we can tailor a travel programme to their specific needs.” Another application of big data in the travel industry would be the personalisation of offerings made to enhance the customer experience. For instance, with big data it is possible to come to an informed prediction as to who prefers hotels with a gym or running track nearby or that are conveniently located to the office. Being part of a global organisation means that FCM in South Africa can take advantage of the global infrastructure. “We have seven data analysts in our business. They clean the data, which we send to a data audit centre in Singapore. From there we are able to access it from a single global repository that we are able to mine to our advantage.” This, says Barkhuizen, is part of FCM’s competitive advantage. Brought to you by Flight Centre Travel Group.