Here’s what caught our attention on Tuesday: 1. Steinhoff debt restructuring agreement extended A deadline was set on Monday for Steinhoff creditors to accept the retailer’s debt restructuring plan but was extended, without reason, to Tuesday at 9am. Steinhoff shares fell to R2.81 from R3.08 once the extension was announced. The embattled retailer is appealing to creditors to accept its lock-up agreement, to avert it from paying its debt for three years. Moneyweb is reporting that creditors have till July 20 to accept the agreement. Update to follow. 2. ANC rejects state ownership of all land The land debate is dominating conversation in South Africa at the moment. In the latest development, South Africa’s ruling party the ANC says it is against the rhetoric that all land must belong to the state. The party says it stands for all people to have similar rights to land. According to Bloomberg, President Cyril Ramaphosa says that the party is going to “embark on an agricultural revolution to empower people to work land effectively”. 3. Oando refutes media reports on arbitration matter African energy company Oando announced via Sens on Tuesday that The London Court of International Arbitration did not order Oando to pay any sum of money to Ansbury Investments and that it is no way indebted to Ansbury Investments. This comes after news reports claimed that The London Court of International Arbitration ruled that the energy company has to settle a payment of $680 million to the Ansbury Investments following an investments dispute. 4. Capital and Regional trading update UK-based specialist property Reit Capital and Regional issued a trading update for the first half of 2018. The period saw a like-for-like growth of 1.7%, while the outperformance of the national index was down 3.4%. The company says it completed 21 new lettings and 23 lease renewals, totalling £3.3 million in contracted income. The company’s financial results for the year ended June 30 2018 will be released on August 14 2018. 5. UDM’s Bantu Holomisa may be sued for defamation The Pretoria High Court ruled on Monday that the President of the United Democratic Movement, Bantu Holomisa, is prohibited from perpetuating information on media platforms regarding the alleged involvement in corruption of three businessmen. The CEO of Infrastructure Investor Harith General Partners Tshepo Mahloele, the former deputy finance minister Jabu Moleketi and the chief investment officer of financial services group Lebashe Investment Group, Warren Wheatley were named in the letter. Moneyweb is reporting that the businessmen are pursuing a separate defamation lawsuit against Holomisa.