Here’s what caught our attention on Friday: 1. Steinhoff obtains creditor support Steinhof is on its way to repair its balance sheet and debt crisis as it finally got the backing of creditors to restructure its R148 billion debt. The retailer reached out to creditors for funding that would help it settle its debt over a three-year period. Bloomberg is reporting that Steinhoff still needs to finalise some processes before the lock-up agreement comes into effect. Shares gained 12% at one stage on Thursday following the announcement. 3. Sasol issues trading update Energy company Sasol issued a trading statement for the year ended June 30, 2018 in which it says that it expects to deliver “resilient results underpinned by higher sales and production volumes”. The company says Ebitda is expected to increase between by between 6 and 16%, core headline earnings per share is expected to decrease between by 1% and 11% or R0.46 and R4.30 per share. Headline earnings per share is expected to decrease by between 16% and 26% and earnings per share is also expected to decrease by between 52% and 62%. The company says its results were heavily impacted by Eskom’s unplanned supply interruptions. Read: Sasol sees profit falling up to 11% on R16bn of charges 3. Christo Wiese named in Sars claim The South African Revenue Service has named billionaire Christo Weise and former executives at ENSafrica in a claim stating that he has more than R217 million in unpaid taxes. Bloomberg is reporting that this forms part of a larger R3.7 billion claim. The papers were filed at the Western Cape High Court. The claim is calling for Wiese and the executives to pay R217 million, personally. 4. Brics bank to boost SA loans The New Development Bank (NDB) is planning to lend as much as R8.1 billion more to South Africa to level dynamics between its five member states, namely, Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa. Bloomberg is reporting that the NDB says it should be lending at least $800 million to each nation, and seeks to achieve that this year. The NDB started operations to support infrastructure and development projects in emerging markets. Brics leaders will be meeting in Johannesburg next week for its 10th annual summit. 5. Rand update On Thursday the South African Reserve Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee decided to keep the interest rate at 6.5%, citing risks such as the US and China trade war being a danger to inflation. The rand weakened sharply on Thursday in response to the decision but stabilised to R13.55 to the dollar at 8:43 in Johannesburg on Friday.