Roughly two decades ago, a market watcher wrote a book suggesting that the Dow Jones Industrial Average would rise to 40 000 points by 2016. The Dow reached an all-time high of 26 616.71 in January 2018, but it hasn’t been anywhere near the 40 000 level. Forecasting is a mug’s game, and yet not a day goes by without a commentator predicting some future value for indices, the rand, gold or oil. But life is uncertain and the further out one tries to predict, the more likely you’ll be wrong. Yet, proposing various outcomes – commonly referred to as scenario planning – can sidestep some of these issues, says Barbara Price-Hughes, portfolio manager at Sasfin Wealth. While a lot of research houses use this kind of modelling behind the scenes, it doesn’t really find its way into the public eye as it can easily create the impression that a researcher believes an index will reach a particular level at a future date, instead of just posturing about potential future outcomes. Moreover, the scenarios can be quite technical to explain. The Alsi The FTSE/JSE All Share Index (Alsi) has not been regarded as an appropriate depiction of the local economy for quite some time. At one stage, resources had a significant weighting in the index. More recently, Naspers’s growing dominance has been a point of contention and there have been issues around the complexity of ownership of the Alsi’s constituents. Price-Hughes says at the moment, the Alsi is particularly distorted by Naspers and the removal of SABMiller. Yet, despite all its imperfections, the index remains the most widely used indicator of the local market’s performance. Investors have been very frustrated with the index’s movement over the past three years and economic growth projections and policy uncertainty make it difficult to see where future earnings will come from. Against this background, Price-Hughes ran a few scenarios of where the Alsi might go, given certain conditions. The scenarios are not based on technical analysis, but rather use earnings forecasts, mean long-term and 15-year price-earnings levels as well as the current price-earnings (P/E) ratio as inputs and consider historical standard deviations (how the index tends to deviate from the mean over time). The longer-term mean covers most of the Alsi’s generally available history, whilst the 15-year mean is more representative of the post-democracy period during which inflation was generally lower. At the moment, the Alsi is trading at a current P/E ratio of around 17.4 times. The long-term mean P/E of the Alsi is 13.2 times, whilst the 15-year mean P/E is 15.9 times, she says. This data is then used in conjunction with consensus forecast earnings for the next 24 months to create various scenarios of where the Alsi might trade in future, and of the potential expected return from equities. The first scenario Assuming the current valuation of the Alsi remains intact and the consensus earnings forecast is applied, the modelling suggests that the index could reach 69 000 points in one year. “It is not totally unlikely, [but] I don’t want to say it is going to happen.” However, there is also a possibility that things could turn sour on the economic or political front. “If various different factors change that cause a mean reversion one standard [deviation] below, it would take you down to about 51 000 and if we rerated it would take us up to 75 000 – that is one year out.” Under a rerating scenario, the index could reach 86 000 points in two years, supported by quite a “kicker” forecast for Naspers’s earnings 24 months out, she adds. The second scenario Another possibility is to determine conceivable future Alsi levels by applying the 15-year mean P/E ratio (15.9 times) to earnings forecasts, which is quite a likely scenario. This would take the Alsi to about 63 500 index points in one year, and to 72 000 in two years. This is not a great return, Price-Hughes says, “but it is not terrible either”. It’s in line with the long-term average. Assuming inflation remains relatively muted, this scenario could come to fruition, she adds. “It’s not a forecast, just a possibility. Investors need to be cognisant of these valuations when buying both individual counters and the index in the context for forecasting returns. This is particularly important in light of the current All Share weightings, whereby in and of itself the All Share remains tricky to benchmark against.” Brought to you by Sasfin Wealth.