Here’s what caught our attention on Friday: 1. It’s the third and final day of Brics Here’s what we know so far: All five members committed to and signed a declaration on Thursday in support of an open and inclusive multilateral trading system, as per World Trade Organisation rules. This comes after Chinese president Xi Jinping called on institutions to reject protectionism and unilateralism – making reference to US president Donald Trump’s proposed trade tariffs. Jinping says ‘there is no winner in a trade war’. (Put that on a t-shirt). In a second note, Russian president, Vladimir Putin, held private discussions with President Cyril Ramaphosa about providing nuclear energy to South Africa, to which Ramaphosa responded, ‘South Africa is not yet at a point where it can sign on the dotted line’, due to South Africa’s current stagnant economy. 2. Oando results Nigeria-based petroleum company, Oando is reporting an 11% increase in turnover to N297.3 billion and a 53% increase in gross profit to N51.0 billion for the six months ended June 30. The company is also reporting a 86% increase in profit after tax to N8.5 billion. The company says it recorded a cumulative production of 6.8 million barrels of oil in 2018, and observed a recovery in the oil industry this year. 3. SA Express ready for take off After almost two months of being grounded, the South African Civil Aviation Authority (Sacaa) confirms that SA Express is ready to take (limited) flights again. The airline was grounded due to safety concerns in May, and following certification from the Sacaa, two of its planes have been granted permission to take to the air, for now, Reuters has reported. 4. ConCourt makes ruling on labour brokers The highest court in the land ruled on Thursday that job seekers who have been absorbed by a company through the services of a labour broker for a period longer than three months, will now become an employee of the company only and not also that of the labour broker. For many years, the labour market has grappled with the phenomenon of dual employment relationships, which Numsa argued creates confusion and uncertainty, and prejudices vulnerable employees. The judgment has massive implications for the profitability of labour brokers and the provision of their services after the lapse of the three-month period as a large portion of SA’s workforce is employed through labour brokers. Read: A bruising blow for labour brokers 5. Naspers CEO seeks to expand horizons The CEO of media and tech giant, Bob van Djik, has said that he is considering listing some of the company’s businesses out of South Africa in an attempt to reduce the overall size of business. According to Bloomberg, despite these considerations, Naspers is committed to retaining a primary listing on the JSE.