Given its relative size in the local market, Naspers is one of South Africa’s most talked about shares. On its own, it currently represents around one fifth of the entire value of the JSE. Even on a price-to-earnings ratio of over 60 times and price-to-book multiple of over 4.0, the counter remains a buy according to analyst consensus. Naspers has risen from R180 per share to over R3 300 per share in the last 10 years, but still the market appears to be expecting more. It is currently the most widely-held local stock amongst South African managers. It appears in the portfolios of 415 local unit trusts. Yet, increasingly, some asset managers are becoming more willing to express their doubts about its potential future growth. Speaking at the Allan Gray Investment Summit this week, the chief investment officer at Perpetua Investment Managers, Delphine Govender, pointed out that it’s not always clear why funds hold the stock in their portfolios. The intrinsic value “Most managers who own Naspers have it as one of the top shares,” Govender said. “We are not sure whether that’s because they think it’s one of their best investment ideas, or if it’s simply because its too big in the benchmark and they don’t want to take that benchmark risk or career risk.” In Perpetua’s case, however, they simply don’t see value in it. “One of the reasons we struggle with Naspers is how much optionality of growth we have to price into the share to justify its share price,” Govender said. “It has been a fantastic investment for South Africans, but the tricky thing is that we believe that the fundamental, sustainable value of Napsers is below the current share price.” She argued that world markets are currently in an environment where high growth technology stocks have been bought up to extreme prices. According to data from Bank of America Merrill Lynch, the combined market values of Facebook, Amazon, Apple, Microsoft, Alphabet, Baidu, Alibaba, and Tencent exceeds $5 trillion. That is more than the market capitalisations of either the entire Eurozone or Japan. This extreme concentration in just a few stocks is reason for concern for Govender. It has never been seen before, and one has to consider that all things normalise over time. However, Allan Gray’s chief investment officer, Andrew Lapping, argued that Naspers is actually undervalued at its current levels. Even discounting its holding in Tencent, which he believes is over-valued, and placing a holding company discount on the counter, he believes that the stock is trading below its intrinsic value. “We get close to R4 000 per share,” Lapping said. “So we think there are multiple layers of safety in the current valuation.” The Tencent story Karl Leinberger, chief investment officer at Coronation, was also bullish on the stock. He believes many investors undervalue Tencent, of which Naspers currently owns around 31%. “For me the real essence of Tencent, and we cover Chinese tech very closely, is this is an extraordinary management team,” he said. He pointed out that the company started off with just an instant messaging app, and every category it subsequently went into, it was a latecomer. There were therefore established companies that it had to compete against, yet Tencent has successfully become either the biggest or second biggest player in every one of those adjacencies. “Whether you look at their Facebook equivalent, WhatsApp equivalent, their music, gaming, advertising, cloud services, or digital payments businesses, they have been late in every single case and have either come to dominate the market or come to be a strong number two player,” Leinberger said. “Even with the benefit of the enormous traffic they bring with them, the execution in each of those categories has been astounding.” He said that what this shows is that when trying to value Tencent today, you really can’t know where the business is going to be in just a few years from now. “Today Tencent has businesses worth tens of billions of dollars that weren’t there just three or four years ago,” Leinberger pointed out. “It certainly is a company I happily would pay what we think the assets today are worth because there is so much optionality.” A tech leader Further supporting this optimism, he argued that some of the technology being developed in China is way ahead of anything elsewhere in the world. “It’s very western to say that China just replicates what America has done, because it’s not the case,” said Leinberger. “There are many areas where China is way ahead of the rest of the planet. For example, WeChat is miles ahead of anything available elsewhere.” For Govender, however, the risks simply appear too high. When a stock is as popular as Naspers is, it is natural for a value investor to be cautious. She prefers to wait until its valuation looks more attractive. “We believe there is going to be a time for us to own Naspers, and that will be a time when you least want us to own it,” Govender said. “But that will also be the best time.”