Anglo American gave the green light to a giant new copper mine in Peru while also rewarding shareholders as its first-half profits surged. The century-old miner, which almost collapsed amid a commodity crisis just 2 1/2 years ago, is more aggressively pursuing growth at a time when its bigger rivals are focusing on returning money to investors. The company on Thursday said it has signed off on its $5 billion Quellaveco project in Peru. Anglo’s first-half underlying profit climbed 11% to $4.58 billion and the London-based company will pay a dividend of 49 cents a share, it said in a statement. Still, earnings per share of $1.23 fell short of analyst estimates of $1.28. Debt was further cut to $4 billion. The world’s biggest miners are becoming increasingly bullish on copper and looking to add exposure to the metal that’s trading near a one-year low. There are expectations that expanding power grids around the world and an electric-vehicle boom will boost demand, while supplies are constrained and new deposits are hard to find. “This strong financial result derives from our consistent productivity improvements in the underlying operations and a stronger price environment for many of our products,” chief executive officer Mark Cutifani said in the statement. While Anglo’s focus on building a big new mine sets it apart from most of its rivals, there’s still an element of caution after years of over-exuberance. The company has brought in Mitsubishi Corp. as a 40% partner in the Quellaveco project, as part of a policy of avoiding solo developments after a $14 billion Brazilian iron ore project almost led to Anglo’s collapse. Anglo has said it plans to start construction of Quellaveco later this year, with production starting in four years’ time. The project, which will cost $5 billion to $5.3 billion, holds about 7.5 million metric tons of copper and will produce about 300 000 tons a year. It hasn’t been all good news for Anglo. The company earlier this year said its giant Minas Rio iron ore mine in Brazil will remain out of production for the rest of the year as it scans and fixes leaks on a 529-kilometer (329-mile) pipeline. It said today that the inspection is on track and remedial work should be completed in the fourth quarter. The first of the big major miners to report earnings, it also said it’s experiencing rising input cost inflation. In May, Rio Tinto Group’s CEO said inflation is starting to hit producers, and those with the highest costs would get hit the hardest. © 2018 Bloomberg L.P