When Steinhoff announced its interim results on Friday, many investors expected the numbers to be poor. What many didn’t expect, however, was that the dividend payment to preference shareholders would be reinstated. It seemed remarkable that a company that had reported a net cash outflow from operating activities of €802 million (R12.9 billion) would be in a position to pay dividends of any sort. This is particularly because Steinhoff acknowledged that in “all periods presented, the group’s current liabilities exceed the current assets”. In other words, it is factually insolvent. This is therefore not a company that should be paying dividends. And, in reality, it isn’t. The preference shares are not issued by the Frankfurt-listed Steinhoff International Holdings NV. They are issued by one of its subsidiaries, Steinhoff Investment Holdings. The local subsidiary As the diagram below shows, Steinhoff Investment Holdings is only exposed to the group’s African assets and South African debt. Its balance sheet is not impacted by the European and US businesses.  Source: Steinhoff As revealed in Steinhoff’s results, the African operations, which are dominated by the former Pepkor business, are the only significant part of the business that is in good health. The preference share dividends are therefore being paid out of a business that is robust enough to do so. “When Steinhoff International moved its domicile to Amsterdam and listed in Frankfurt, it didn’t transfer all of the South African assets,” explains Andrew Dowse, manager of the Bridge Diversified Preference Share Fund. “The new assets that were acquired in Europe and the US were housed on a different side of the balance sheet.” As the bulk of the company’s shareholders remained in South Africa, it made sense to do this since it mitigates against currency risk when it comes to paying out distributions. As most dividends are paid in rands, it makes payment easier if there is excess cash generated in rands by a local subsidiary. It’s also significant that the Steinhoff preference share is cumulative. In other words, if a dividend is missed, it is not just written off. It still has to be paid at a later date, together with interest accrued over the period for which it was overdue. “In other words, the longer you don’t pay it, the bigger your bill becomes,” Dowse explains. “It’s more like a debt instrument in that way.” So why was it stopped? Given all of this, a relevant question actually becomes why Steinhoff halted payment of the preference share dividend in the first place. After all, it’s not a major strain on the company in the greater scheme of things. There are 15 million Steinhoff preference shares in issue, and the dividend declared was R4.27. That translates to a total payment of a little over R64 million, which is not a major number in the life of a company with over R100 billion of debt to worry about. However, Dowse suggests that there were possibly two issues in play. “Management is probably well aware that the vast majority of the market is not familiar with the fact that a preference share is issued by a subsidiary,” he points out. “People assume that the preference and ordinary shares are issued by the same entity. So if you’re a bondholder and you have already suffered significant capital losses, you could get very upset if Steinhoff then declares a dividend on the preference share. You wouldn’t want them to be paying out capital.” It may therefore have been necessary for Steinhoff to pause the distribution in order to have time to explain the dynamics to its creditors. The company certainly couldn’t have run the risk of alienating them further. Secondly, not paying a preference share dividend might also have bought management time in another sense. “It allowed them to keep capital on hand on the African side of the balance sheet to shore that up a little and let them reorganise some liquidity lines,” Dowse suggests. This is because Steinhoff Investment Holdings could not have paid any dividends up to the parent company without paying preference shareholders first. As long as the preference share dividend was suspended, no other distributions could be paid off the African balance sheet. “My suspicion is that they needed to secure the creditor agreement letters for extending terms of payment and debt standstills before they would pursue returning dividends up to the parent where the debt holders could get their hands on that cash,” says Dowse. “Preference shareholders and their rights therefore provide a convenient speed-bump to management in negotiations with bondholders on the European side of the balance sheet.” This is important, because of the state of Steinhoff’s operations in Europe and the USA. As Dowse notes: “The sustainability of the assets on the European and US side of the balance sheet depend entirely on the performance of the South African assets bailing them out, if they survive at all.”