Here’s what caught our attention on Tuesday: 1. African Bank, PPC get a thumbs up from S&P S&P Global ratings has improved the rating of two South African businesses. African Bank announced via Sens that S&P has raised its National Scale credit rating to zaA- from zaBBB, and the outlook remains stable. S&P also raised cement manufacturing company, PPC’s long-term corporate credit rating to zaA-, citing PPC’s ‘broadly stable’ underlying credit metrics, earnings and liquidity. Read: Why S&P is upbeat on PPC 2. Sarb calls for probe into Capitec fee The South African Reserve Bank (Sarb) contacted the National Credit Regulator (NCR) to investigate a loan-origination fee imposed by Capitec Bank. The issue regarding the fee first came up in a report compiled by Viceroy in January. The report says that Capitec’s income was boosted by excessive fees on its multi-loan product. Bloomberg is reporting that the investigation is still underway, and the CEO was not aware of the referral. 3. Sibanye cuts gold output for 2018 Miner Sibanye-Stillwater, which came under fire for deaths of 21 miners this year alone, is seeking to address safety issues at the mine. The CEO Neal Froneman said that the gold output for 2018 would be 6% lower and will come at a higher cost due to the disruption in operations. South Africa’s chief inspector of mines, David Msiza is conducting an investigation into the miner deaths, Bloomberg reported. 4. The behind-the-scenes of Steinhoff The dirt behind the Steinhoff saga is unfolding as its most recent financial results, released on Friday, revealed a six-month loss of R9.6 billion to the end of March 2018, and, furthermore, it shows that the company overstated its operating profit by over R16.1 billion in 2017. Moneyweb is reporting that the sheer magnitude of the irregularity means that this may not have been a one-man job, (referring to Steinhoff’s ex-CEO Markus Jooste), and under the circumstances of the losses obtained, Steinhoff does not have much (assets) to sell to save itself. Read: Steinhoff – one guy couldn’t have done it 5. Central bank weekly bond auction South Africa’s Central Bank’s weekly bond auction takes place on Tuesday. Update to follow.