The ANC has decided to change the Constitution of South Africa so it can push ahead with its plans to expropriate land without compensation, President Cyril Ramaphosa has said. Ramaphosa’s announcement follows a two-day ANC lekgotla held in Pretoria that concluded on Tuesday. Ramaphosa said changing the Constitution to expropriate land without compensation will happen through a parliamentary process. “The lekgotla reaffirmed its position that a comprehensive land reform programme that enables equitable access to land will unlock economic growth, by bringing more land in South Africa to full use, and enable the productive participation of millions more South Africans in the economy,” he said. “The ANC will, through the parliamentary process, finalise a proposed amendment to the Constitution that outlines more clearly conditions under which expropriation of land without compensation can be affected.” Ramaphosa said the expropriation of land without compensation would promote redress, advance economic development, transform SA’s spatial planning and promote urban and agrarian reform. He was addressing the nation on ANC resolutions taken on land redistribution and a stimulus package for jobs and economic growth. The rand weakened by more than 1% after Ramaphosa’s announcement on Tuesday evening. The rand had been trading at R13.10 against the US dollar and weakened to R13.26 by 23:19. At its 54th national elective conference in December 2017, the ANC resolved to expropriate land without compensation. To do this, it implored the government to begin a process to amend Section 25 of the Constitution – known as the property clause. The ANC’s latest announcement is a dramatic shift as it initially proposed that expropriation should be done in line with the Constitution and after wide public consultation. Ramaphosa has repeatedly said that expropriation of land without compensation must be done in a manner that doesn’t harm the economy or affect property rights, and which improves food security. He said the proposal will be carefully considered by a Constitutional Review Committee, which would weigh up the merits of changing the constitution. The committee, which is currently holding public hearings on the matter, worked on the wording related to amending Section 25 and determining how many of the current pieces of legislation would have to be repealed or kept unchanged to expropriate land without compensation. The committee has to report back to Parliament on its findings by September 28. Essentially, the ANC has resolved to change the Constitution while the committee is still conducting its work. Academics, investors and economists have warned the ANC that if the land expropriation proposal is not carefully considered it would have adverse consequences for the economy and individual property rights. Ramaphosa also said the ANC has decided to introduce a stimulus package for the economy to ignite economic growth, tackle unemployment and mitigate the rising costs of living.