Here’s what caught our attention on Wednesday: 1. Brics summit commences Presidents, prime ministers and business leaders are congregating at the Sandton Convention Centre from Wednesday to Friday for the 10th Annual Brics Summit. Leaders from Brazil, Russia, India, China and our very own, South Africa, will be chatting up each other to find ways to give a lift to their economies and strengthen trade between each other. What’s on the agenda today? Read here: www.brics.org.za 2. China invests $14.7 billion in SA Following some charming discussions with Chinese President Xi Jinping on Tuesday, President Cyril Ramaphosa announced China’s decision to invest $14.7 billion in South Africa; to provide a $2.5 billion loan to power-utility Eskom from China Development Bank and to give another loan worth $300 million to logistics firm Transnet, courtesy of the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China. The countries say this is all in an effort to strengthen the cooperation between their emerging economies. This is only the beginning, let’s see how the rest of the Brics summit unfolds. Read: Eskom, Transnet to also get cash injections from China 3. AECI results South African chemicals group AECI is reporting a 24% increase in revenue to R10.473 billion and a 35% increase in profits from operations to R911 million for its 2018 half year results. The company is reporting a 19% increase in headline earnings per share to 458 cents, while Ebitda rose 28% to R1.258 billion. AECI is declaring an interim cash dividend of 149 cents per share, up 8%. The company attributes its strong performance to the contributions from acquisitions of Schirm and Much Asphalt, effective February and April respectively. 4. Hulamin lowers EPS, Heps for the six months Aluminium company, Hulamin, issued a trading statement on Wednesday, notifying shareholders that it has amended its previously stated earnings per share and basic headline earnings per share. The company says it now expects earnings per share to be between 10 cents and 16 cents or between 82% and 71% lower for the six months ended June 30, 2018. Hulamin previously stated that it expects earnings per share and headline earnings per share to be no higher than 25 cents. The company’s results for the six months ended June 30, 2018 will be released on July 30. 5. Commission extends inquiry into government corruption The commission which has been looking into allegations of government corruption announced that it has extended the inquiry for 24 months from March this year to allow for it more time to complete investigations. Bloomberg is reporting that if the extension is confirmed for October 2, the commission will be able to complete its work without further interruptions.