Anheuser-Busch InBev NV streamlined its global management structure after marketing spending on the soccer World Cup hurt second-quarter profit growth at the world’s largest brewer. The Leuven, Belgium-based company is trying to become more agile by shifting to six geographic zones from nine, with new Middle Americas, South America and Asia Pacific areas combining previously separate jurisdictions, it said in a statement Thursday. The changes come as the maker of Stella Artois said earnings rose 7% to $5.57 billion on an adjusted basis before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortisation. Analysts surveyed by Bloomberg expected 8% growth. The World Cup campaign for Budweiser, AB InBev’s flagship lager, began in May as the company readied to square off against Carlsberg, the market leader in host nation Russia. AB InBev is seeking to drive more revenue from athletic tournaments and social occasions after the past decade’s influx of smaller brands weaned drinkers off its mass-market brews. To address that challenge, the company is investing $2 billion in promoting its brands and improving supply chains in the US. The brewer had forecast a drag on earnings growth of between 0.5 percentage point and 1 percentage point from increased spending on the World Cup, saying the marketing boost would be more weighted to the second quarter. AB InBev’s restructuring also brings marketing and the company’s ZX Ventures incubator unit under common leadership, and creates new executive positions overseeing nonalcoholic beverages and company-owned retail. The changes are effective January 1. AB InBev cut a further $199 million worth of costs in the second quarter from the acquisition of SABMiller Plc, the benefits of which were partly offset by the brewer’s increased marketing spending. Sales in the US, AB InBev’s largest driver of revenue, fell by 3.1% in the second quarter, weighed down by a weak industry, the company said. AB InBev’s marketing efforts helped it sell more beers in stadiums than in the 2014 World Cup in Brazil, the company said. © 2018 Bloomberg L.P