British American Tobacco (BAT) and Sasol are two of the largest listings on the JSE. Both have been staples of investment portfolios for many years, but have fallen a little out of favour more recently. In the case of BAT, concerns about regulatory action in the US and the growth of next generation products, such as vapour, have led to a sell-off in the stock over the last eight months. From trading at over R940 per share in mid-November last year, the counter has fallen back to current levels of under R730. However, Truffle Asset Management chief investment officer Iain Power believes this has created an interesting buying opportunity. “You were paying 20 times to access one unit of BAT cash flow, now you are paying 12.7 times just a couple of months later,” he says. “This is an attractive entry point from a rating point of view.” Bataleur Capital’s Kevin Williams says that if you consider that BAT is a staple company like beer and spirit producers or fast-moving consumer goods companies, it is also attractively priced relative to this peer group. “The company’s earnings growth outlook at upper single digits, somewhere between 8% and 10% a year is not out of line and even better than a lot of them,” Williams says. “So it’s certainly not ex-growth from an earnings point of view.” He adds that the outlook for BAT is also better than other businesses in this space. “The bigger companies like Proctor & Gamble, Nestlé or Unilever have very unexciting prospects for growth, but their ratings are still very high. Even though there are massive changes taking place in the cigarette industry globally, you’re not paying for any of BAT’s earnings growth. The valuation is providing you with a nice margin of safety.” Power adds that tobacco companies have faced concerns about the sustainability of their earnings for decades, but they have continued to be profitable because of their pricing power. “The bottom line is that tobacco is an addictive substance,” he points out. “Secondly, of the average price of a box of cigarettes, 70% is tax. So the amount that the tobacco companies are getting is 30% of the pack price. If they put that up by 10%, the effect on the total cost of that pack is quite low.” He acknowledges the validity of the argument that with falling volumes at some point the cost of cigarettes will be too expensive, but Truffle believes that is still some way off. “In the United States over the last 30 years, the number of cigarette sticks smoked has fallen by 40%,” continues Power. “Yet the profit pool of the entire tobacco industry has grown three times, and it’s because they are able to price aggressively. They can push up prices more than Nestlé, more than Procter & Gamble, and all these other businesses.” Sasol Sentiment towards Sasol has also been less than positive, but for quite different reasons. Lower oil prices have impacted on its profitability at the same time that the company has been spending billions on its ethane cracker project in Lake Charles, Louisiana. “We bought this share aggressively late last year on the thesis of Lake Charles,” Power says. “They have spent $11 billion on this chemicals project and it was not reflected in the Sasol share price at all.” If anything, the market was only seeing the negative impact of the investment on the company’s cash flow and income statement. “Because they have spent so much money on this project, they have been in a negative cash flow position for the last couple of years,” Bataleur’s Williams notes. “They still will be this year, but that will start changing during the course of next year and you’ll see a lot of free cash flow generation coming through.” Power says that when one adds Lake Charles into a valuation of Sasol, the stock looks to be trading at a very appealing level. “When we look at the value of the old Sasol, excluding the ethane cracker, we get normalised earnings of around R50 per share,” he says. “That’s using a normalised rand of R13.50 to the dollar and an oil price of $75 per barrel. If you take R50 per share of earnings on Sasol’s long-term price-to-earnings multiple of 10 times, that gives you R500 a share. That is the current share price. So this big project that is turning on in the next three months, you are picking up for nothing.” Truffle’s valuation of the Lake Charles project is an additional R200 per share. “So we would say there is margin of safety,” Power says. “If there is a calamity in the world and the oil price comes down to $65 per barrel, or the rand strengthens, you have R200 of value here that you are not really paying for.”