Tinkering with a tax system to meet social objectives such as the reduction of poverty and inequality is a noble idea – but there is need to tread carefully, especially in a country like South Africa. The Davis Tax Committee, appointed by then minister of finance Pravin Gordhan in 2013, has done extensive work on which tax design will suit SA’s unique set of circumstances. Many of its recommendations are in line with international best practice. The committee submitted 25 reports to the minister and provided advice and guidance on revenue-raising initiatives such as limiting fiscal drag for personal income tax, increasing the top marginal rate for personal income tax, increasing the capital gains tax inclusion rates, and increasing the fuel levy. Developed countries, and more specifically member countries of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), have in the past used their tax systems to ease inequalities – with dire consequences in some instances. Bert Brys, senior economist at the Centre for Tax Policy and Administration of the OECD, says countries have to introduce complex measures to reduce the heavy tax burden on individuals. He argues that the effect of trying to use the tax system to reduce inequality is that the redistribution pie becomes smaller because of the tax burden – to the point that many no longer see the sense of participating in the labour market. Brys likens the personal income tax burden in some countries to “extortion”; there have been cases where 60% of the total tax revenue came from personal income tax and employer contributions to social security. Brys presented his views during a recent panel discussion organised by National Treasury in Pretoria. He warned South African policymakers against falling into the same trap as OECD countries which introduced social security systems to boost equality. The moves were accompanied by declines in redistribution through the tax system. Transfers to people in need became less progressive. Citizens had to be incentivised to work rather than getting social assistance in the form of unemployment benefits. Efforts to get people back into the labour market included the awarding of tax credits if people work a specified number of hours, which they can use to reduce their tax liability. Cecil Morden, former chief director in the economic and tax analysis unit at Treasury, said the warning signal around social security taxes is one that the country should take to heart. The introduction of a National Health Insurance and funding it through the payroll system might just be the last straw that breaks the camel’s back, he said. Keith Engel, CEO of the South African Institute of Tax Professionals and former chief director of the legal tax design unit at Treasury, said the middle class is being squeezed. “Redistribution only affects the upper middle and never hits the top. Meanwhile, various forms of redistribution within and without the tax system already provide support for the poor.” Personal income tax rates in the OECD were 65.7% in 1981. This was lowered to 43.3% in 2016. The tax-to-GDP ratio in the OECD is on average 34.3%. In SA, which is battling low growth and high unemployment, the tax-to-GDP ratio is more than 26%. The top marginal personal tax rate is 45%. The tax burden, carried by a relatively small tax base, is already causing taxpayers to look at ways to “lighten the burden”. Government has acknowledged that non-compliance has increased in recent years. Thabi Leoka, economist and member of the Vat panel reviewing the effectiveness of the basket of zero-rated items, says in an environment where there is no growth, tax policies seldom help to reduce inequality. It does the opposite, she says. The risk of credit ratings downgrades at the start of the year and the country’s ability to repay its debt was greater than having the Vat rate increased. However, she says it becomes very difficult to explain that to 55% of South Africans who are earning less than R100 per month and are experiencing chronic hunger. The panel has to present its recommendations to finance minister Nhlanhla Nene and the Davis Committee at the end of this month. Brys says Vat should be seen as a revenue raiser. Any efforts to reverse the decision to raise it will render little results. Prices have increased and businesses will not reduce them when the Vat increase is reversed. He also warned against increasing the basket of zero-rated items. The country needs the revenue. African Tax Administration Forum research director Nara Monkam shares the view that poverty and inequality are not “inevitable or accidental”, but the result of deliberate policy choices. Some of these choices that may reverse inequality include free health and education services (with all the contention around it); decent wages, progressive tax systems and opposition to the special interests of power elites, says Monkam. There seems to be consensus that the potential distortive effects of inefficient tax policies are far greater under an inefficient government.