On Thursday morning research house Intellidex released a report into short selling in general, and the actions of Viceroy Research in particular. The analysis had been commissioned by Business Leadership South Africa. While maintaining that short selling “can have a positive effect on capital markets” by improving market efficiency and price discovery, Intellidex argued that it is vital to scrutinise whether what activist short sellers are doing is legitimate. Put simply, is the research on which they base their activism well-founded? In the case of Viceroy, Itellidex was highly critical of the firm’s output. It found that its report on Steinhoff, which had catapulted it to prominence, was ‘substantially plagiarised’, and the quality of its research since then ‘appears to have deteriorated’. Read: Intellidex: Viceroy’s report on Steinhoff was ‘substantially plagiarised’ A particular case in point is Viceroy’s analysis of Capitec, which has been roundly criticised from many quarters. Intellidex found that it was not objective, that it cherry picked negative information, and failed to ‘provide a reasonable basis for the conclusions that it draws’. Despite these failings, however, the report had a significant impact on Capitec’s share price. From a high of R1 069 in the days before the report was released, Capitec dropped to R800. It is worth asking why such a questionable report had such a serious market impact. Why did anyone pay attention to research that Intellidex said “exhibits a failure of professional standards”? The answer lies in the aura that Viceroy had generated around itself through the release of the Steinhoff report. “We all get taken in by a good story,” Intellidex’s executive chairman Stuart Theobald told Moneyweb. “When Viceroy published the Steinhoff report, it was anonymous, there was lots of speculation around it, and a kind of mythology was created.” As the media, we bought into this myth. Starved of just about any information on what had actually happened at Steinhoff, Viceroy’s analysis was sensational. It was good analysis too (although questions are now being asked about how much of it actually originated from Viceroy). It was so good, in fact, that when rumours began circulating that Viceroy was working on a report about another South African company we eagerly speculated about where it might be looking. We know well in advance that another report similar to what it had produced on Steinhoff would be big news. Which is why when Viceroy published its research on Capitec, we made a cardinal journalist error: we published first, and only asked questions later. However, within hours of the research being released its tone and some of its more extravagant claims were already being publicly questioned. Before the day was out, serious misgivings were being raised about its selective use of information, and the conclusions it had drawn. We reported on these doubts, and the narrative around the report changed fairly quickly, not least of all because of Capitec’s own excellent response and the confidence expressed in it by the local regulators. Yet the impact had already been felt. As the media, we had to acknowledge that we had been caught napping. We had been so drawn into the Viceroy myth, that the story we reported on was simply that the report had been released. We didn’t stop to consider what was actually in it and whether it deserved our attention. Bear in mind that research reports are released every day. Almost none of them make the news, no matter how good they are. Yet, because of the sensation that had been created by its report on Steinhoff, Viceroy’s Capitec report was a lead story. Intellidex rightly noted that: “While we have argued here that Viceroy has an unearned influence which it has used to affect prices beyond that justified by its research, it has played a positive role in giving South Africans an opportunity to assess and understand the actions and motives of short sellers. In that respect, Viceroy has done a public service.” Part of that service is that it has caused members of the media to reflect on how we should manage our reporting. It’s not something we should take lightly. “Unfortunately, many members of the public are not equipped to assess financial research and determine its quality,” Intellidex noted. “This means the media play an important role as the interpreter of such financial research and in assisting the public in understanding it. One lesson from the Viceroy saga is that the media need to take this responsibility seriously. In the case of Viceroy, many media outlets too easily became a part of the research release strategy, directly aiding to promote its impact.”