 RYK VAN NIEKERK: Welcome to this Market Commentator podcast, my weekly podcast, where I speak to leading investment professionals. My guest today is Jonathan du Toit of Truffle Asset Management. Jonathan, welcome to the show. Currently there is a bit of turmoil, uncertainty, gymnastics, call it what you want, in emerging markets; South Africa is also affected. Over the past few weeks we’ve seen a significant outflow of capital from South Africa due to political tensions elsewhere. How do you view this, if you take a 1 000-foot view of what’s happening currently? JONATHAN DU TOIT: Thank you for having me on the show. We are quite worried about what’s happening on a global front. As you say, if you stand back and you look at it we’re basically ten years into a bull market. It’s now the longest bull market ever in history, so that’s the first warning sign that starts to blink at you. The second thing that’s worrying us is if you look at what’s happening with long bonds, certainly in the US, you see what’s happening in the ten-year – it’s ticked up past 3.10 now. What that does is when you start to get higher interest rates in the US … what’s been happening for the last ten years is because interest rates were so low there was a lot of capital looking for another home. So you had a lot of money going into emerging markets, and South Africa was a big beneficiary, [with investors] coming in and buying our bonds because you could still get decent yields when you couldn’t get them in the US. Now with that yield going higher it starts to pull capital out of emerging markets, out of South Africa, back into the US and that’s net negative for emerging markets. The [other] thing is the US, with Trump cutting taxes. What he’s done is there’s an increased budget deficit, now if you look at the US they issued about $500 billion worth of bonds last year. This year they are doubling it: they’re going to be issuing about $1 trillion worth of bonds. Again, you could say the delta is about $500 billion worth of money that is going to get sucked out of the world into the US and that’s got to come from somewhere. So it’s on that backdrop. But also if we look at equity markets, if we look at valuations, both globally and locally, we’re on the wrong side of fair value. If you look at longer-term multiples where markets have traded, markets look a bit expensive to us. So it’s a whole combination of all of those things that makes us pretty nervous about what’s going to happen. RYK VAN NIEKERK: Morgan Stanley calls it the end of easy. Obviously the easy money off the table and some of the valuations, especially of the big US tech stocks, are significant. But what should an investor do? If you are nervous then how should a retail investor feel? JONATHAN DU TOIT: From our perspective most retail investors would be in a balanced fund or a flexible fund. What that means is you’ve got a fund manager making the asset allocation decision for you and we are busy pulling back our net equity exposure through a combination of selling some equity and also putting on hedges, in case there is that big event where we do get something that causes the market to fall 20%, 30% fairly quickly. So your fund manager is doing it for you in a Regulation 28 or a balanced fund or flexible fund.  Sit on your hands in times of volatility RYK VAN NIEKERK: … obviously there are so many views on the market but one of the investment lessons of many books is sit on your hands in times of volatility, don’t try and time the market. JONATHAN DU TOIT: Obviously I can’t speak for the other fund managers; I can just tell you what we are doing at Truffle. We are busy pulling back the amount of net equity exposure because of these concerns. RYK VAN NIEKERK: But, again, how actively are you doing this? When do you actually decide to try and be more conservative? Is it a process that you implement over a certain period? Is it a decision you take? It’s a long-term decision, it’s not just a short-term knee-jerk. JONATHAN DU TOIT: Yes, you do it gradually; it’s also a function of when you’re looking at your ranking table, your value guide, to say how much upside can we see in equity markets in particular counters. We do still have some counters, which we see quite a lot of upside in, which we are not going to be tallying down. But when we look at the market as a whole it doesn’t look particularly cheap and, as I said, there are a lot of global factors which concern us at this moment. So in times like that you start increasing your cash balances, maybe start looking for a little bit more fixed income. So you’re still getting a return but obviously you’re not expecting a 20% return from equity; you’re looking at a 7%, 8% return coming from cash or near cash instruments. RYK VAN NIEKERK: I think many investors would take 7% or 8% in 2018 after last year’s good performance and the uncertainties we are currently seeing now. JONATHAN DU TOIT: Yes, sure, that’s exactly the case, take a certain 7% or 8% rather than potentially expose yourself to quite a lot of volatility and potential downside.  Truffle General Equity Fund RYK VAN NIEKERK: I’m looking at the Truffle General Equity Fund – it’s a pretty big fund. R1.4 billion and the top-ten holdings are the big hitters on the JSE: Naspers 12% of the portfolio, Old Mutual 9% and then Sasol, British American Tobacco and Standard Bank – heavy hitters. Do you think that’s where the current value in our market is? JONATHAN DU TOIT: We do also have some mid-caps and small caps that don’t obviously show up in the top-ten holdings because we don’t hold as an absolute percentage a very large amount of them. Certainly Naspers. Naspers was over R4 000/share in November last year; it came back to under R3 000. Tencent recently reported that results were quite good. Obviously there’s a lot priced in in terms of growth in Tencent but we still see a lot of growth coming through from Tencent. So that’s why we’ve got that Naspers holding and we’re quite comfortable with it. Read: Tencent beats estimates as WeChat, mobile games drive growth RYK VAN NIEKERK: But there’s a lot of noise around Naspers, the big discount to the underlying Tencent valuation. What is your view on it? JONATHAN DU TOIT: We’ve seen that holding company discount – that’s how we refer to it – blow out to 40-odd percent. Could it go more? Possibly a little bit, but we think that pain of Naspers underperforming Tencent has already been taken. It’s obviously around various issues at Naspers. Naspers sold some of their Tencent shareholding, they sold roughly 2%, they didn’t give it back to us as shareholders. They said ‘no we’re going to keep the cash and we’re going to use it for our new business ventures’, which the market takes a bit of a dim view at, because I don’t think the market fully trusts management from a perspective of their capital allocation in terms of where they have been spending a lot of money on a lot of new initiatives and we haven’t seen great returns coming out of that yet. They keep telling us that long term it’s going to be great, but the jury is still out. RYK VAN NIEKERK: But that’s an interesting thing to say. Obviously quality of management and trust in management is critical for any investment and most people use Naspers as a conduit to invest in Tencent. Should you not rather go directly and invest in Tencent? JONATHAN DU TOIT: Sure, obviously our fund has an SA-only mandate, so it can’t do that. Certainly one argument from my side is yes. There’s that 40% discount that sits right now, but that discount is not going to be there in five years’ time. I think something is going to happen in the structure of Naspers such that Naspers doesn’t continue to trade at such a large discount.  Cash and property in the portfolio RYK VAN NIEKERK: I see that your cash component to the portfolio is around 6.6%; I assume, alluding to our previous discussion that would increase in the short- to medium term? JONATHAN DU TOIT: Six is probably a little bit high because that is an equity fund, so that would have been at the end of the last month when there would have been a few transition changes. Six percent is probably where it is going to sit – it won’t go much higher than that. RYK VAN NIEKERK: Property also around 6%. There were some developments, especially around the Resilient Group, in the listed property sector. It seems like it’s a significant exposure to that sector, were you invested in Resilient? JONATHAN DU TOIT: No, we had no exposure to the Resilient Group, so most of our exposure comes through Growthpoint and Redefine. Yes, bond yields going higher will be net negative for those property counters. If I give you Growthpoint, Growthpoint is on a forward yield of about 7.5%, growing at 6.5%. So if you put the two together and you assume no rating change, you get a 14% return, which we think is quite attractive. Obviously with bond yields pushing higher you might get less than that 14%, but where we are right now we are quite comfortable with that. RYK VAN NIEKERK: You also said you have a few mid-caps in your portfolio. Can you give us one or two you feel bullish about? JONATHAN DU TOIT: Sure, we’ve got a bit of Sirius Real Estate, which is a German property counter that’s done quite nicely for us over the years and we’ve also got quite a lot of Hulamin, probably just under a percent. Hulamin, we think longer term that there is quite a lot of upside potential in the company. Management has been working quite hard in order to improve their efficiencies and the way that they do business, so we can see quite good upside on that too. RYK VAN NIEKERK: I think many analysts are looking at Hulamin and there is a good growth story potentially there. But the mid-cap sector has always lagged. Obviously Naspers did distort the market a bit, but do you think fund managers look enough at some of the mid-cap stocks that could offer more value than, say, Richemont? JONATHAN DU TOIT: I probably disagree with you when you say mid-caps have always lagged. In the last two years yes they have definitely lagged; certainly last year it was the heavy hitters, it was Naspers and so on that gave a lot of return. But if you actually look at it over the longer term, small- and mid-caps generally outperform the big cap stocks – I’m talking ten, 20 years now. The problem with the mid- and small-cap space is that there isn’t that much liquidity, so when you buy the share you must be very certain that you are happy to hold it for a longer term, so for a five-year plus horizon. The way I explain it to the rest of the team is I always say you must understand when we are buying a small- or mid-cap it’s part of our private equity portfolio. Yes it’s listed, yes it’s part of our fund, but don’t think if something goes wrong in the company we’re going to be able to get out of this thing quickly. We have to hold it and we have to be very confident … that it has got the long-term growth potential that you see in it. So don’t buy a small cap if you think there is a rerating coming.  Bullish SA prospects RYK VAN NIEKERK: In the notes to your fund fact sheet you are pretty bullish about the prospects of South Africa under Cyril Ramaphosa, especially starting with his addressing of the problems at Eskom and SAA. Many other analysts feel that ‘Ramaphoria’ is starting to wane. How do you think local political developments can influence equity prices in the short- and medium term? JONATHAN DU TOIT: We are positive. The delta is net positive. I think in South Africa Cyril has got a lot to do; there are things he needs to sort out and I actually think he has moved quite quickly, in terms of if you look at his Cabinet appointments and if you look at the state-owned enterprises and trying to clean up the mess that’s there. So we are quite positive on that. That is also going to feed through to higher GDP growth numbers for South Africa, which again is great. So domestically-focused companies we think longer term there is good upside. However, if you look at the last six months, equity markets are very forward looking. So what happened was with the ANC elective conference and the positive outcome with Cyril and then when Cyril replaced Jacob Zuma as president, the market said this is fantastic and that pushed a lot of domestic counters up probably 30%, 40%, which was a little bit too much in our minds. So we used that opportunity to sell down. However recently they’ve been coming back a bit, so they’re starting to look a little bit more interesting to us again. Markets are quite volatile and we’ll happily take advantage of that volatility. But longer term, certainly on a five-year plus, if you look at South Africa for the last nine years we’ve lived in a very uncertain environment; businesses don’t like uncertainty. The key thing with businesses is they want to know the rules of the game and then they can make a decision. Nobody has known the rules of the game for the last nine years and we think going forward that’s going to be quite positive. RYK VAN NIEKERK: But one of the consequences of Cyril Ramaphosa’s election as president is the rand strengthened; obviously that hit the big hedge stocks. Do you think investors who take a positive bet on South Africa should then maybe sell down the hedges and go more for locally-focused companies? JONATHAN DU TOIT: We actually have an opposite view on the rand. We think the rand from here is going to weaken and that sounds counter to what I’ve just said, but the reason why the rand is going to weaken is due to global factors. Also if you look at our platinum and gold mining sector, both of those sectors are really, really struggling at the current rand/dollar exchange rate. Our view is that there’s only one platinum counter that’s actually making money at the current rand/dollar exchange rate, which means that either the rand needs to weaken, or there’s going to be a lot of job losses and a lot of pain coming in that sector, which again is net negative. So that’s why we can’t see the rand staying below R12/dollar for any extended period of time. We think it will go in the other direction. RYK VAN NIEKERK: That was Jonathan du Toit, asset manager at Truffle Asset Management.