SA’s big banks have been willing to help distribute social grants, however the mismanagement of the South African Social Security Agency (Sassa) under the watch of former Social Development Minister Bathabile Dlamini and the agency’s onerous tender requirements have discouraged the banking sector. Commercial banks were meant to collaborate with the South African Post Office to administer the payment of grants to 10.7 million beneficiaries after Cash Paymaster Service’s contract expired on March 31 2018. Despite the commitment by banks to avail their ATM infrastructure, payment processing systems and bank accounts to Sassa, they remain excluded from SA’s social-grants payment network. Instead, the Post Office is now responsible for a majority of grant payments while CPS’s contract – declared invalid by the Constitutional Court in 2014 – was recently extended for a further six months to distribute only cash payments to 2.5 million elderly and disabled beneficiaries. Facing pressure from Parliament and the top court to ditch CPS, Sassa is now pushing banks to be involved in the grants payment system. Sassa has asked larger banks to create standardised low-cost bank accounts. However, banks are unhappy about this request, saying the accounts would create problems with competition authorities. Banks have also complained about an information vacuum, accusing Sassa of not releasing information about how many of the eight million beneficiaries (excluding those using CPS cash pay points) access their grants via ATMs. Sassa’s new acting CEO Abraham Mahlangu, who filed the agency’s first monthly report on Monday as required by the court, said banks were provided the information via payments clearing house Bankserv. “Preliminary reports from the banks indicated that at least 80% of beneficiaries are banked and are actively using their accounts, although not necessarily for receipt of their social grants,” said Mahlangu. Social grants products Banks have argued that they each have unique products that are appropriate for grant beneficiaries, hence why standardised bank accounts won’t work. Nedbank’s Joanne Isaacs said the bank is still committed to working with Sassa. “Nedbank already has existing products aimed at inclusive banking. We continue to position these products to Sassa beneficiaries and will work with Sassa on any future needs,” said Isaacs. Ryan Prozesky, the CEO of FNB Consumer Core Banking, said Sassa beneficiaries can elect to receive their grants through its “cost-effective” pay-as-you-use Easy account. He added that by June 2018, grant beneficiaries will be able to access their money through a mobile bank account, with no monthly fees. Barclays Africa and Standard Bank did not respond to requests for comment. Tender history Banks are yet to submit their tender bids and be contracted by Sassa for their services. This is a process that banks know too well if history is anything to go by. At least three banks – Standard Bank, Barclays Africa and Nedbank – have engaged Sassa since 2014 about their inclusion in the grants payment network. At the time, a Sassa tender required banks to produce, distribute and manage cards that beneficiaries would use to access their money at ATMs, Sassa dedicated pay points and retail outlets. Most of the banks were excluded from the tender by Sassa, which opted for CPS’s service on the basis that the company was able to distribute grants at a competitive price of R16.44 per beneficiary. As CPS’s contract neared expiration in March 2017 (later extended by the court for another year), calls for Sassa to include banks in the payment system mounted. In November 2016, Sassa revisited negotiations with banks for the development of new Sassa cards and a payment platform. But the talks never led to an agreement to collaborate, even though Sassa issued a request for proposal or tender in December 2016. Sassa insiders said Nedbank, Barclays Africa, Standard Bank, and FNB considered the tender but didn’t submit bids as the tender document was vague on the role of banks and was laden with jargon such as “card loading and acquiring functions”. This made it difficult for banks to propose products to help with social grant payments. Another obstacle was former Social Development Minister Bathabile Dlamini. Former Sassa CEO Thokozani Magwaza told a Constitutional Court-mandated inquiry in February that Dlamini ordered him to dig dirt on commercial banks in order to discourage them from being part of the social grants payment system. This was the first explosive confirmation that Dlamini rejected the efforts of banks to bid successfully for Sassa contracts, in order to favour CPS. Read: Dlamini ordered former Sassa boss to ‘find dirt’ on SA banks Now that Dlamini has been replaced by Susan Shabangu as social development minister, banks might finally have a shot at being paymasters.