Here’s what caught our attention on Friday: 1. ATON acquires ordinary shares from M&R ATON made an offer to all Murray & Roberts (M&R) shareholders to acquire a portion or all of the ordinary shares issued by M&R and not owned by ATON for R15 per M&R share, according to a Sens statement on Friday. ATON acquired 18 254 275 M&R shares on Wednesday for an average consideration of R16.99 and a maximum consideration of R17 per M&R share. Following the settlement of the acquisition on May 28, ATON will own 194 352 620 ordinary shares in M&R – comprising 43.7% of voting rights in M&R. 2. SACAA recalls SA Express flights Following the intervention of Pravin Gordhan, Minister of Public Enterprises, the South African Civil Aviation Authority (SACAA) on Thursday suspended all flights of state-owned airline SA Express, citing safety concerns, after SACAA conducted an audit on the operations. Reuters reported that SA Express has lost many executive members following graft allegations. 3. Afrimat’s international bid Mining and construction materials group Afrimat reported a 10.5% increase in revenue to R2.5 billion and a drop in headline earnings per share to 180.07 cents. Afrimat declared a dividend of 42 cents per share for the year ended February 28 2018. The CEO, Andries Van Heerden, said on Thursday that Afrimat has made an offer on an acquisition owned by international investors who want to exit the South African mining sector. Van Heerden says foreign investors are nervous about property rights and policy uncertainty in the mining sector. 4. Sarb and independence President Cyril Ramaphosa said he is committed to keeping the South African Reserve Bank an independent entity, even though the ANC was considering nationalising the bank last year. Ramaphosa said Sarb should deal with monetary policy while government deals with the fiscus, Bloomberg reported. On Thursday Sarb’s Monetary Policy Committee announced its decision to keep the repo rate on hold at 6.5%. 5. CPS pleads losses National Treasury has asked SA’s chief justice to order the South African Social Security Agency (Sassa) to release money to a unit of Net1 UEPS Technologies, Cash Paymaster Services (CPS). CPS warned of potential financial loss and asked Treasury to set a minimum fee for it to charge Sassa for the provision of cash payments to social grant recipients. According to Bloomberg, Sassa plans to reduce the number of cash recipients and has not informed CPS about the change, leaving it with additional paypoints which would risk a month loss of R111.7 million.