In an ideal world, most investors would reach retirement with sufficient money to draw an income that could sustain them for the rest of their lives. But because most South Africans don’t have enough money to maintain their standard of living in retirement, some sort of uncomfortable trade-off is often required. Living standards may have to be reduced or investors could draw a higher income early on, but that increases the risk that they may run out of money. Chris Tisdall, head of Direct and Private Clients at Allan Gray, says at the point of retirement, investors are faced with a daunting set of choices. The first is what portion of their funds they should take as a cash lump sum. Currently provident fund members can take all their funds in cash, but investors who used retirement annuities or who were members of a pension fund can only take up to one-third of their money as a lump sum. The first R500 000 will be tax-free. The remaining funds are used to buy either a life (guaranteed) or a living annuity. A life annuity is bought from an insurer, provides a guaranteed income for life (an inflation-linked option can be chosen) and offers piece of mind. It generally also continues to provide an income to the retiree’s spouse when he or she passes away, but the “remaining funds” at the point of death can’t be redistributed to heirs. A living annuity provides more flexibility – the investor can choose the level of income (legislation allows drawdown rates of between 2.5% and 17.5% of the capital per annum), and the remaining funds can be left to beneficiaries at the point of death, but the investor carries both the market and the longevity risk. Thus, if the drawdown rates are too high, the investor lives longer than expected or the returns disappoint, there is a higher risk that the money will run out and that the retiree will need to approach children or the state for help. While the drawdown decision may largely be informed by the expenses that have to be covered, it is worth looking at the drawdown question from another angle: Given a certain starting annual income as a percentage of the total capital, what real return would an investor need to achieve in order for their money to last ten, 20, 30 or 40 years? Tisdall says while some of these time horizons are quite long, there is a very strong likelihood that people who retire in their fifties and sixties may still live another 30 or even 40 years, given current mortality rates. The table below sets out the results of the modelling. The numbers assume that the initial drawdown is only adjusted by inflation each year and that there is no volatility of returns (i.e. the investor receives exactly the same return every year).  Source: Allan Gray As an example: If a pensioner draws 4% of her capital in her first year of retirement, she will need a 2.2% real (above-inflation) return in order for her capital to last 30 years. If another pensioner takes 8% of his capital and also wants it to last 30 years, he would need to achieve an 8.2% real return from the underlying investments for the money to last. Tisdall says long-term local and offshore equity and bond returns suggest that there is about a 50% chance to achieve a 5.5% to 6% real return. This suggest that the real returns in the bright red blocks to the right (eight blocks) are most probably optimistic. When one takes into account that investment returns won’t be achieved in a straight line and that the investor will draw an income from a portfolio that will be subjected to volatility of returns, it means that even less generous scenarios (as represented by the three lighter red blocks in the table), especially for longer periods, may be pushing the envelope. “This chart really does suggest that if you are moving towards retirement and starting to think about how much money you will draw – and similarly if you are already in retirement – that 4% drawdown is most probably where we should be starting.” This is difficult, Tisdall says. The average drawdown rate in Allan Gray’s own living annuity book is somewhere between 7% and 7.5% and “life is only getting more expensive”. Where investors do draw an income at higher rates, Tisdall suggests that they should consider taking compensating actions – like not increasing their income on an annual basis. Read: Why income drawdown strategies in retirement do matter Alternatively, investors could also consider some sort of life or guaranteed annuity to guarantee a portion or possibly even all of their income in order to have peace of mind that the money will last for as long as they need it, he says. More importantly perhaps, is that retirees should carefully consider what assets they need in the portfolio to generate the real returns they require. Tisdall says research done in the US in the 1990s by financial advisor William Bengen and corroborated by their own research in the local market, suggest that most retirement investors would probably need a minimum of 50% exposure to risk assets like shares over the life of their retirement.