Here’s what caught our attention on Friday: 1. SAA to get R5 billion capital injection Government has promised to give cash-strapped airline South African Airways (SAA) a R 5 billion cash injection, on top of the R20 billion it has already given in state guarantees. This comes after CEO Vuyani Jarana said the airline needs a cash injection “now”, Reuters reported. The airline has not generated a profit in seven years. Jarana said on Thursday that the money will be used to repay creditors and suppliers, while the balance will be used to support the airline with working capital in October/November. 2. ArcelorMittal under pressure Steel manufacturing company ArcelorMittal is facing some hard times, as local sales have gone down 2% and the domestic demand remains weak. According to its operational update for the period ending March 31 2018, the company said there’s a continuous pressure of imports on the downstream products and volatility in the rand/dollar exchange rate is impacting the business. The company forecasts that local sales will remain under pressure in the second quarter. 3. Net1 ‘looks forward’ to ending Sassa contract Net1 UEPS Technologies said in a Sens results announcement on Friday that it looks forward to being released from social grants payments, and will begin focusing its skills on delivering services to unbanked populations. For the third quarter of 2018, Net1 reported a revenue growth of $163 million and generated $85.2 million in cash flow operations. The company said growth was due to improvement in the insurance and lending businesses, however operating incomes and operating margins were adversely impacted. 4. Tekkie Town wants Steinhoff transaction cancelled Tekkie Town filed court papers on Thursday for the cancellation of a R3.2 billion acquisition made by Steinhoff in 2016. Tekkie Town said it wants the transaction to be cancelled because “what Steinhoff was representing at the time was false”, Moneyweb reported. Steinhoff said in a Sens statement on Thursday that Tekkie Town vendors made demands of R1.75 billion. 5. Goldman Sachs may raise SA GDP forecast Goldman Sachs may again up its prediction for South Africa’s GDP forecast. It previously raised its forecast from 1.5%  to 2.4%, after President Cyril Ramaphosa’s election as leader of the ANC. Reuters reported that business confidence reached a high in January, while the rand reached an all-time high in February when former President Jacob Zuma resigned, however it has lost some ground since.