Tigon-accused Gary Porritt on Tuesday denied that the prospectus 4 000 investors in Progressive Systems College Guaranteed Growth (PSCGG) relied upon, was a fraud. Porritt, together with his co-accused Sue Bennett, is on trial on more than 3 000 charges of fraud, racketeering and contraventions of the Income Tax Act, Securities Exchanges Control Act and the Companies Act. The charges relate to events that led to the collapse of JSE-listed financial services group Tigon that guaranteed the PSGCC investments. Porritt was the CEO of Tigon and Bennett a director. Among other things, the state alleges that Porritt and Bennett conspired with state witness Jack Milne, then CEO of Progressive Systems College and known as an investment guru, to defraud investors. This they allegedly did by fraudulently creating the impression in the PSCGG prospectus that Milne would invest the funds in a diversified portfolio, while all along planning that Porritt would invest the funds only in the shares of Tigon and its subsidiary, ShawCell. Porritt is currently cross-examining Milne, who is the first and main state witness. Milne earlier reached a plea and sentence agreement with the state relating to the same events and served time in jail as a result. The mood in court was very tense on Tuesday as Judge Brian Spilg disallowed many of Porritt’s questions on the basis that they are irrelevant. Porritt accused Spilg of sabotaging his cross-examination and Spilg responded that Porritt is free to ask for his (Spilg’s) recusal. The accused indicated months ago that they believe Spilg is biased and would apply for him to recuse himself, but have so far failed to bring an application to that effect. Porritt blames Spilg for this failure, saying he and Bennett asked for two months’ adjournment to prepare the application, but Spilg refused. Spilg in fact “made sure we have no time to prepare”, Porritt said. Porritt on Tuesday tried to show that investing PSCGG’s funds in Tigon’s shares was warranted, since the shares were expected to increase in value following the proposed secondary listing of the group in London. Milne agreed that such a listing would result in growth in the share value, but added that he would have checked how far the plans for the listing were before taking a decision. The listing never proceeded. Porritt further tried to show that while the prospectus indicated a broad investment mandate, it did not compel the fund manager to invest in all the instruments at the same time. It would have made sense, in light of Tigon’s good prospects, for PSCGG to first build a position in Tigon and diversify at a later stage, he contended. Milne insisted that the PSCGG investors clearly did expect, on the basis of the prospectus, that their money would be invested in more than only the two shares controlled by Porritt. Milne also referred to a note from then-financial director at Tigon, Tony Hodgkinson, to Porritt, indicating that Tigon did not have the R200 000 needed to pay a certain invoice at the time. Milne said he did not at the time have sight of the note. If he had, he would have realised that Tigon was cash-strapped and would have reconsidered doing business with Tigon. Porritt responded, saying Tigon always employed all its cash to the limit of its liquidity and that was the reason it was able to show superior returns. Judge Spilg on Tuesday overturned an order he made the previous Friday for the South African Revenue Service (Sars) to come to court to explain whether his tax affairs were in order. This followed after Bennett on Friday brought to Splig’s attention an article in the latest issue of Noseweek, which contains what the publication dubbed Sars’s Naughty List. The list was sent to Porritt and Bennett by former Tigon auditor, Gary Ramsey, years ago and she subsequently attached it to an earlier affidavit to the National Prosecuting Authority boss at the time, Vusi Pikoli. The list purports to be a leaked Sars document containing the names of the top tax defaulters at the time. The Noseweek article did not disclose why the historic document has become relevant now, but contained images of parts of the list from which the taxpayers’ names and outstanding amounts could be read. Bennett pointed out to Spilg that his initials and surname appear on the list, owing Sars R3.6 million. The implication was clear that Spilg may be conflicted in the Tigon matter, since Sars is funding the prosecution. Spilg on Friday said his tax affairs are, and always have been, in order. He said in fact, Sars owes him R100 000. He said he might not be able to continue with the trial unless the matter is cleared up and ordered Sars officials to come to court on Wednesday to give clarity on his tax affairs. He also asked Bennett why she raised the matter in open court, knowing Moneyweb’s reporter was present and added: “Motive is important”. On Tuesday he however stated that he made the order on the basis of assumptions at the time. He has since read the article and said Sars does not need to come to court anymore. He did not give any further explanation. The trial will continue on Wednesday. Porritt is in custody after his bail was earlier withdrawn due to his non-appearance in court. Bennett is out on her own recognisance.