The growing dominance of Naspers in various local indices and the meltdown of the Steinhoff share price in the wake of an accounting scandal have raised questions about managing concentration risk in client portfolios. How do fund managers mitigate risk in a prudent way when investments are concentrated in relatively few assets or stocks? Gerrit Smit, fund manager of Stonehage Fleming’s Global Best Ideas Equity Fund, argues that the focus should be on the quality and sustainability of the businesses. His fund, a high conviction concentrated portfolio that currently includes 25 holdings, is non-benchmark cognisant. The challenge is to generate solid compound growth over time at a low risk. If the fund outperforms the benchmark in the process, it is a bonus, he says. As soon as fund managers start pitching decisions based on an overweight or underweight exposure relative to a benchmark, the decision to diversify is based on reasons other than fundamentals, he argues. For this reason, he doesn’t believe that his fund carries significant risk due to the relatively low number of shares it holds. Smit says he is “not sure” he has sympathy with growing concerns about concentration risk in the FTSE/JSE All Share Index. Portfolio managers need to make decisions based on the growth potential and risks related to a business without constantly checking what the benchmark weight is. While a benchmark-cognisant fund manager may argue that using the index as a default starting point in the construction of client portfolios will result in lower business risk, Smit is not convinced it is in the best interest of clients. “Why would you want to pay someone to try and outperform the index regardless of the quality of the businesses?” he asks. Although the fund has a global orientation (with emerging market exposure), it holds no JSE-listed stocks, but is closely following developments around Naspers and Discovery. At the end of April, 6.7% of the fund was allocated to Visa, 6.4% to Tencent and 5.5% to Zoetis, a global manufacturer of drugs and vaccinations for pets and farm animals. The fund’s strategy is based on four pillars – firms are screened for sustainable organic growth, quality of management, efficiency and free cash flow generation to be eligible for inclusion. Against this background, there is a strong focus on balance sheet strength, incremental returns on invested capital and the ability to grow dividends annually. With a maximum of 30 shares allowed in terms of its prospectus, the fund can theoretically have an average exposure of 3.3% to each company. Practically, this varies from about 2.5% to almost 7%. Where the weighting is close to 7%, this was the result of growth, Smit says. In terms of UCITS regulation – unit trust rules for funds sold in the European Union – funds may not hold more than 10% of the portfolio in a single stock. It also requires that the collective holding of all positions that exceed 5% may not top 40%. Smit believes the combination of these two requirements is the right approach and is a responsible way of overcoming concentration risk. To stay within the 40% limit, he has had to trim exposure on three occasions in the year to date and reduced its holding in Estée Lauder and PayPal in the process. While the US equity bull market may have masked the risks in some concentrated portfolios, concerns about what would happen if a bear market should ensue are only relevant where the focus is on short-term performance, he argues. The fund’s four-pillar focus and emphasis on dividend growth under all circumstances should provide a buffer when the market pulls back significantly. In a bear market, volatility is expected to increase, but with regard to non-cyclical businesses that grow their dividends on a continuous basis, this should be temporary, he adds. After spending more than 25 years in the investment industry, Smit says it is “crystal clear” that a responsible long-term investment strategy is to buy solid businesses and to ensure you don’t overpay. “Stick to a good business. Don’t look for a reason to change your view every three weeks. Make sure that when you buy, you buy the right business.” Of course, in the investment world, mistakes are bound to be made. Many fund managers thought Steinhoff was a good business. Although Steinhoff is a business with a global orientation, the fund did not have exposure. Since the business primarily grew through corporate action and not organically it was disqualified from inclusion even before questions about management were raised, Smit says. “I’ve seen it before. Corporate action can work for some time. It doesn’t work forever.” If the businesses can’t grow organically in a sustained manner, there is bound to be a problem at some point, he adds.