In what appears to be another grave oversight that could invite more litigation from shareholders, Steinhoff chose not to inform investors of the dispute and potential claims arising from Tekkie Town vendors ahead of the private placement of Steinhoff Africa Retail (Star) shares conducted in early April. Steinhoff announced on April 11 via Sens that it was seeking to place (sell) 200 million shares in Star to help alleviate the liquidity crisis it was facing as banks cancelled or failed to renew funding lines to the group in the wake of the accounting scandal that was discovered in December last year. Investec Bank acted as sole bookrunner in placing the shares, which was done at a price of R18.75/share and raised gross proceeds of R3.75 billion. But, according to letters in Moneyweb’s possession, written on behalf of the lawyers representing a consortium of the previous shareholders of Tekkie Town, the Steinhoff Supervisory and Management Board knew about the claims relating to the Tekkie Town acquisition and bonus scheme in late March, a full week and a half before the Star book build was conducted. Read: Tekkie Town files for reversal of Steinhoff acquisition The first letter dated March 28 was directed to Star chairman, Jayendra Naidoo, and Star CEO, Leon Lourens, and copied to Steinhoff chairperson, Heather Sonn and Steinhoff acting CEO, Danie van der Merwe. Webber Wentzel – acting on the instruction of the consortium of Tekkie Town vendors led by Braam van Huyysteen and Bernard Mostert – drew attention to the fact that an earn-out, or bonus scheme based on the performance of Tekkie Town under Steinhoff’s ownership was agreed to by Markus Jooste, and then amended by previous Star CEO, Ben la Grange. Part of the purpose of the letter was to “ensure that clients’ rights and those of others that will benefit from the bonus scheme are recorded formally, particularly in light of the fact that Star’s contingent liability for payment of the earn out is not recorded in any of its financial documents”. Based on projections furnished to it by its clients, Webber Wentzel estimated the earn out would be in the region of R455 million to R890 million at the expiry of the scheme (September 2020). Read: Tekkie Town files suit for R1 billion potential claim for ‘earn out’ The second letter, also dated March 28, was directed to Steinhoff chairperson Sonn and ccting CEO Van der Merwe respectively, and copied to Star chairman Naidoo and CEO Lourens. The letter begins by laying out a summary of the transaction that saw Steinhoff acquire Tekkie Town for R3.2 billion in 2016. It also lays out the basis on which the Tekkie Town shareholders drew conclusions on the value of the Steinhoff shares that were being used as part payment for the transaction. This included representations from Jooste, Steinhoff’s prelisting statement published ahead of its Frankfurt listing, as well the group’s 2015 annual financial statements. The letter states: “Steinhoff and Jooste’s representations induced the sellers to enter into the agreement and have now been exposed as false.” As remedy, and based on the premise outlined in the previous paragraph, the lawyers then argue that their clients should be placed in the position they were in before they entered the sale agreement with Steinhoff. But, this should be done carefully: “Our clients are, however, mindful of the severe implications that a reversal of the transaction may have on a quantitative and reputational level, not only for Steinhoff, but also for Star, and have therefore instructed us to first engage in dialogue, before exercising any of our clients’ formal remedies.” The letter concludes with a word of warning and caution, and almost prophetically speaks to what Steinhoff would undertake just a few days later: “Steinhoff (as controlling shareholder in Star) and Star, ought to exercise caution in dealing with any Tekkie Town assets or the shares in Tekkie Town and, in particular, ought not encumber any Tekkie Town assets or the shares in Tekkie Town until such time as this matter has been resolved. Furthermore, we record that Steinhoff should exercise caution in any sale or book build of Star shares.” So, given the fact that in two separate letters, material issues in relation to claims by the vendors of Tekkie Town against businesses of Star had been raised, and despite an explicit warning regarding selling Star shares, why did Steinhoff not disclose this information to the market? Steinhoff chose not to answer the question. The company stated the following: “Steinhoff International Holdings NV received a summons from the Tekkie Town vendors on May 11 2018. As a result of the legal dispute we are unfortunately unable to comment further.” Update: The issue of materiality appears to be self-evident. When news broke of the claim regarding the reversal of the acquisition, Star’s share price fell 3.37% on the day (11 May), and in the following two trading days fell another 7% to close at R16.94 a share on Tuesday May 15. Investec also needs to clarify its position. Was it not informed of the potential litigation involving Tekkie Town? Or did it choose not to disclose it? According to an industry source familiar with the parties, it would have been incumbent on the management of Steinhoff to disclose the issues to Investec. “What the market will demand from the bank is, was it aware of these letters, if so, what did it do about it, and if Steinhoff is guilty of misrepresenting the facts, what is the response going to be?” What makes Investec’s role even more intriguing is the fact that according to sources, Absa Bank was offered the opportunity to co-run the book-build, but declined to do so. Investec did not respond to questions. Star reiterated its previous statement that noted the Tekkie Town claim for reversal of the acquisition was made against Steinhoff International Holdings, and the chances of the claims affecting it are “remote”.