Here’s what caught our attention on Friday: 1. Liberty remains well capitalised In an operational update for the three months ending March 31 2018, Liberty said via Sens that it is using the 2018/2019 financial year to restore financial performance in the SA retail insurance business, improve investments in Stanlib and simplify the group’s operations. The group said it remains capitalised in line within its current capital regime. For the three months, retail insurance operations indexed new business fell 3% to R1 503 million, compared with March 2017. 2. Municipalities need R22.4 billion to stay afloat An analyst from Ratings Afrika found that South Africa’s 100 biggest local municipalities need at least R22.4 billion to fill a liquidity deficit to stay afloat. The money according to the analyst, would come out of taxpayers’ pockets. Moneyweb reported that only 22 of the 100 municipalities have incurred an operating surplus, while 78 municipalities are operating at a loss. 3. Solution to the housing conundrum The Minister of Human Settlements Nomaindia Mfeketo told Moneyweb that the housing issue can be addressed with government’s intervention, instead of expecting South Africa’s poorer population to build their own homes. Mfeketo said if people have finances to build their own homes, then government will step in to provide land and bulk infrastructure. 4. Death toll from listeria rises to 200+ The number of people who have died from deadly, listeriosis has risen to 204, Reuters reported. However, since the recall of polony and cold meat products from shelves, the number of cases have declined. According to the National Institute of Communicable Diseases, 1 033 cases of listeriosis have been reported. 5. Aspen Pharmacare secures billion euro credit line Aspen Pharmacare, Africa’s largest pharmaceutical company, has managed to secure a €3.4 billion credit facility for refinancing three of its subsidiaries. The company said the facilities were 70% oversubscribed and will be used for Aspen finance and Aspen Pharmacare Ltd and Aspen Asia Pacific. The credit facility was secured by over 28 banks internationally, Reuters reported.