Here’s what caught our attention on Tuesday: 1. Rhodes Food Group H1 results Fresh and long-life convenience food producer Rhodes Food Group (RFG) reported a 16.6% increase in group turnover, to R2.5 billion for the six months ended April 1 2018. Headline earnings are 34.8% lower due to weaker international results. Diluted headline earnings per share decreased 38.9% to 31.4 cents. The bakery and fruit juice categories picked up sales, however, the impact of the stronger rand slowed sales in other African regions. RFG also appointed lead independent director Mark Bower, on Tuesday. 2. Woolworths announces board changes in Aus Woolworths’ Australian operations announced structural changes to its board via Sens on Tuesday. John Dixon resigned on May 21 2018 from his role as regional CEO as, following a strategic cost review, the board took the decision to discontinue the role. The chief executives of the Australian operating divisions will report to group chief executive, Ian Moir. 3. Coronation Fund Managers’ results Twenty five years after its inception, Coronation Fund Managers reported on Tuesday that it has delivered results in line with its expectations. For the six months ended March 31 2018, Coronation reported that total assets under management was at R588 million, a 4.3% drop from last year; diluted headline earnings per share increased 1.2% to 223.4 cents and an interim dividend of 223 cents per share was declared. 4. More secrets in Steinhoff Recent developments in the Steinhoff saga reveal that Steinhoff did not inform investors of the dispute and potential claims arising from Tekkie Town, ahead of the private placement of Steinhoff Africa Retailers shares in April. Moneyweb reported that despite knowing of Tekkie Town’s claims relating to a bonus scheme in March, Star conducted its book build in April to alleviate its liquidity crisis. 5. ANC’s land test The ruling party is not in favour of ‘reckless’ land grabs and expropriation without compensation, Bloomberg reported. The South African Constitution may already allow for redistribution without compensation and the government would have to conduct a test on land laws, before taking the decision to modify the Constitution, the ANC said. Government said the Land Expropriation Bill should be tested in the Constitutional Court.