A number of questions have been raised about a R19 million cash bonus paid to Santam chief executive Lizé Lambrechts in 2017. The bonus was paid under the group’s Outperformance Plan (OPP), one of its five long-term incentive plans. Because of this payment, Lamprechts was the second best-paid executive among listed insurance companies – and the best-paid South African-based one – with remuneration totalling R36.077 million last year, if one includes the value of long-term incentives which vested in the year* (read: Best-paid listed insurance execs). Shareholder activist Theo Botha is urging investors to vote against the insurer’s remuneration policy and implementation report at Wednesday’s annual general meeting. He says the disclosure around the OPP has been opaque since its implementation and that the benefit awarded to the CEO and FD is “excessive”. He says that in its 2015 integrated report, Santam “highlighted that the maximum payment under the OPP would be 200% of TGP [total guaranteed pay]”. He argues that in 2016, this “maximum payment level was increased to 600% without any reasons given” and that the 2017 report “discloses for the first time who the current OPP participants are, as well as the measurement period”. Why are these awards are hidden away in the annual financial statements? He says that “despite the fact that the scheme was established in 2015, the HRRC [Human Resources and Remuneration Committee] has never disclosed either the performance measurements to be applied or targets to be achieved, nor the fact that the CEO and CFO were then already offered participation, and that payment of the benefit to the CEO would accrue in 2017”. Santam, however, says that the award was disclosed in its audited financial statements in 2015 and 2016 (these documents are separate from its integrated annual report). The group also says its “latest Remuneration Report does contain increased disclosure … in order to enhance our application of the King IV Codes”. It is, however, unusual for details of an award like this to be excluded from a remuneration report. Botha highlights out that the “company refers shareholders to the integrated report and to its AGM resolution pack in regards to remuneration issues” and questions “why these awards are hidden away in the annual financial statements?” He argues that “shareholders were unable in 2015 to consider and vote on the grants and whether or not these were in line with their interests”. He says he would “recommend that the board withdraw the awards granted to the CEO and CFO, and if the benefits have already been paid out, they should be claimed back”. Santam defends the OPP grant and payment and says its HRRC “extended the OPP to Ms Lambrechts to reward superior performance over a three year measurement period from 1 January 2015 to 31 December 2017. No payments were to be made under the OPP unless operational targets are outperformed and growth in net insurance results exceeds the hurdle set for the Santam Group, for the period. Full payment is only made if the stretch performance targets are met. There is no interim measurement period. The maximum payment under the OPP to the CEO is six times her 2017 TGP, payable in April 2018.  The final payment was less than the maximum”. Santam argues that the 200% was not changed to 600%, rather that the “maximum payment is 200% of TGP for every year of the period, and over the three-year measurement period therefore amounts to 600% of the TGP over the period of the OPP”. Santam FD Hennie Nel did not receive any bonus under the OPP in 2017 as his measurement period is five years (versus three for Lambrechts). The two also have different hurdle rates in their performance measures. For the CEO, the minimum hurdle as disclosed by Santam is “annualised real growth of 10% based on normalised NIR [net insurance result] for 2014”, while the hurdle for 100% vesting is annualised real growth of 20%”. For the FD, the minimum hurdle is “annualised real growth of 6% based on NIR for 2014”, while the hurdle for 100% vesting is annualised real growth of 9%. Botha is sharply critical of the use of normalised NIR for the hurdle. He contends that in 2016 and 2017, the hurdle was only described as growth in NIR. Using this measure (i.e. not adjusting for one-offs), “the results would’ve shown that no growth occurred under the CEO’s watch”. Nel’s hurdle is still described as growth in NIR (i.e. not normalised). Was this changed to ensure her bonus would be achieved? Why are they treating the two executives so differently? Botha questions why the CEO is measured over three years and the CFO over five, and is concerned about the “difference between the minimum and hurdle rates for the CEO and the FD which has not been explained to shareholders”. “Why are they treating the two executives so differently? Did they have a choice between a three- and five-year measurement period?” He also calls into question the lack of detailed disclosure on how the normalised NIR figure was arrived at to ensure the hurdle was met (Santam says only that Lambrechts achieved a hurdle of 15.6%). Botha is also critical of Santam’s remuneration committee (HRRC) and says it has “not been open, honest and direct with the shareholders in this year’s report, especially in regard to the OPP benefit”. He highlights the fact that the chair of the HRRC, Sanlam CEO Ian Kirk, is “a non-executive director and not independent. This is not in compliance with the principles of good governance per King IV. Furthermore, [Santam chairman] Grant Gelink only attended two out of the four meetings of HRRC. The HRRC should be comprised of a new team of independent directors.” Santam defends Kirk’s role as chairman of the HRRC and says that “in the view of the Santam board, there is no conflict” (Kirk is CEO of Santam’s controlling shareholder). Santam maintains “the majority of the committee consists of independent directors, including the chairman of the board. There is therefore a strong independent influence”. The HRRC consists of Kirk, Gelink and Dawn Marole (an independent non-executive director). Last year, 13.1% of shareholders voted against Santam’s remuneration policy, significant given that Sanlam owns 58.94% of the short-term insurer. Botha says that “notwithstanding that management indicates that it has discussed the remuneration policy with major shareholders, the PIC has voted against this for the past two years and yet no indication is provided regarding the steps that the board has taken to improve these policies”. * Parent Sanlam awarded Lambrechts with R2.43 million in long-term incentives last year which explains the difference in total pay disclosed by both Santam and Sanlam in their remuneration reports. The value of her Sanlam long-term incentive plan shares which vested in 2017 was R5.576 million. Hilton Tarrant can still be contacted at hilton@moneyweb.co.za.