South Africa is following the trends of various technologically-advanced companies including Google and Apple, which over decades have reaped profitable benefits from ‘future-forward’ work environments. Park Square, located on Durban’s upmarket Umhlanga ridge is one example of this environment which invites unlimited productivity and social connectivity. The needs of workers who value flexibility and convenience with technological advances at the tips of their fingers, will be catered for within a green working environment. The scheduled opening of Park Square in November this year will see the unveiling of Nedport’s R1 billion mixed-use office development of 40 000m² situated on the ridge, north of Durban. This project will facilitate the integration of healthy work and play in an innovative office environment, where retail and entertainment offerings are adjacent to the public open space of CJ Saunders Park. The built environment at Park Square comprises 36 000m² of commercial space, 4 000m² of retail space and a 3 500m² open public piazza designed to incorporate a vibrant atmosphere. Ken Reynolds, Nedbank Property Finance divisional executive and director of Nedport Developments says “the dynamics of a future-forward work environment entered the planning equation with the realisation of the need for interaction of work and play between public spaces, retail and offices.” Park Square caters to the needs of occupants who have a preference to work in groups while they interact with their surroundings. Reynolds says the positive impact on employees, whose health and wellbeing has been considered within a community-orientated work space, is evident. Creativity, knowledge sharing, team work and coordination are just some benefits associated with increased productivity through open and flexible environments across the globe. Reynolds says technologically-advanced offerings for future-forward work spaces in fast moving industries are facilitated through collaborative consultation and advanced planning that embraces quality. High building standards at Park Square are incorporated by Nedport, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Nedcor Limited, which in 2009 launched SA’s first Four Star – Green Star Rated building at the group head office in Sandton. “Park Square will feature more than 40000m², designed according to the Green Building Council of SA’s Four Star rating, with a target set for a Five Star and Nedbank Interior Green/Built star ratings,” says Reynolds. He says the economic benefits of Green Star-rated buildings have long been evident in the reduction of occupation costs, as operating expenses are lowered through energy-efficient measures such as water consumption, insulation, recycled interior building materials, and natural lighting. An elegant blend of work and play. With the combination of a spectacular outdoor piazza; tranquil, inviting pockets of greenery, restaurants and shops - Park Square promises to be the premium commercial development in Umhlanga Ridge. Future forward thinking is the hallmark at Umhlanga’s Ridge’s much anticipated Park Square development. A convenient location will reduce the commute and a curated place to work, shop and relax allows for a healthy work/life balance. Future forward workspace thinking at Park Square. This development beautifully combines work and recreation in one convenient space. With its unique mixed-use offering, Park Square will provide a balanced lifestyle making finding a balance between work and life that much easier. People working in Park Square’s 36 000 m²of prime office space will be surrounded by the natural beauty of Umhlanga Ridge. With various natural elements at play, the development affords time for pause and reflection. Park Square’s design is reminiscent of famous European piazzas, complete with café culture. With 36 000m² of P and A Grade office and 4 000m² of retail space, the development will take the concept of work where you play and play where you work into the future. An elegant blend of work and play. With the combination of a spectacular outdoor piazza; tranquil, inviting pockets of greenery, restaurants and shops - Park Square promises to be the premium commercial development in Umhlanga Ridge. Future forward thinking is the hallmark at Umhlanga’s Ridge’s much anticipated Park Square development. A convenient location will reduce the commute and a curated place to work, shop and relax allows for a healthy work/life balance. Large glass enclosures will allow optimum lighting in internal atriums and walkways. A solid wall and performance glass will diffuse heat and direct light from the western façade. Additional features include dematerialisation, where a contact centre will feature minimal ceilings and high off-shutter concrete structure with acoustic control. The installation of a fibre back-bone in the building supplies WiFi connectivity for all work groups. The plug and play process will be managed by a service provider by way of the service agreements of occupants with all major providers, including Telkom. Anchor tenants include Nedbank, which will occupy 50% of the building, together with Spar and IBV International Vaults. Spar marketing manager, Travis Anderson says, “Customers no longer want to shop in large centres. They want the convenience of parking, walking straight into the building, doing their shop and walking straight out. We love Park Square because of its convenient location in a fast-developing area and its proximity to the CJ Saunders park which will allow us extra exposure as we piggy-back off activities held there.” The extended benefits of this prime location will be within reach for smaller tenants who seek flexible rental facilities. Reynolds says the needs of out-of-office employees and small businesses who require a more formal environment will be catered for by a resident service provider. Rental options of 10 to 20 hours per month are set to improve traditional packages of a chair, table, board room and secretarial services. Convenient access offers business tenants an alternative location out of the city. Densification in both the residential and commercial nodes of Umhlanga has followed the gradual move of Durban’s central business district to the north. Upmarket residential areas and roads near the sea infrastructure have been upgraded while increased demand for improved public transport services will impact positively in future. Close proximity to a GO!Durban Integrated Rapid Public Transport Network (IRPTN) stop provides easy access to Park Square. A pick-up-and-drop zone has been allocated for taxis and Uber vehicles, while tenants and visitors have access to business and private parking in the basement. Business commuters will further benefit from the travel distance of only 15km to King Shaka International Airport. Tenants who need to shop will save valuable time with direct access to SA’s largest shopping centre at the Gateway Mall across the way. The positive mindset at Park Square will be reflected in colourful visuals of walls painted by local artists and exhibitions at the resident art gallery. Occupants and visitors stand to benefit from the liberating elements of productive work and play in a future-forward environment. Brought to you by Park Square.