The final default regulations for retirement funds – a regulatory effort to ensure members of retirement funds get good value for money and retire comfortably – took effect on September 1 2017. Default regulation is part of a broader, on-going reform programme that has placed a significant compliance burden on pension fund trustees. As a result, there has been a large-scale shift from stand-alone pension funds to large umbrella funds. An umbrella fund houses the retirement benefits of employees working for various unrelated firms in a single fund, which means it can reduce costs through benefits of scale. Johan Gouws, head of institutional consulting at Sasfin Wealth, says a well-designed umbrella fund offers members a single solution for all their retirement needs – from the day of their first investment contribution to the last income benefit received during retirement. “This allows for a smooth transition between retirement options pre- and post-retirement and for the avoidance of any unnecessary administrative complexities, delays and charges.” Other benefits include sound governance and independence, transparency, simplicity, investment choice, value for money, seamless fund transfers and comprehensive real-time reporting, he adds. While the implementation of defaults is expected to have a meaningful impact on the retirement industry, Gouws says the post-retirement implications are particularly significant, given that trustees will need to cater for living and life annuity options. The options can either be provided on an in-fund basis or involve a third party provider. “Retiring members will have to actively opt into the default annuity solutions. Counselling for members will have to be considered at retirement together with an analysis of the funds’ membership and their credits prior to retirement. “The board will also need to reasonably ascertain the level of income protection granted to beneficiaries in the event of death.” Through on-going reform efforts, regulators are trying to reduce the costs of retirement solutions, discourage investors from cashing in their retirement benefits when they change jobs and ensure there is continuity with regard to the investment solutions through a member’s lifetime, Gouws says. The decision not to preserve retirement benefits when changing jobs is arguably the main reason most South Africans can’t sustain their lifestyle in retirement. In terms of the default regulations, retirement funds that compel members to enrol as a condition of employment, were obliged to change their rules to allow for default preservation. Although employees are still allowed to withdraw their retirement benefits, the funds will automatically be preserved if they don’t specifically choose this option. While the savings and retirement lifecycle used to be a fairly seamless process in the defined benefit space, the move to a defined contribution environment – where members carry the investment and longevity risk – has created a much more fragmented situation. Moreover, members tend to switch between employers more often and cash out their benefits. Even where retirement benefits are transferred to a preservation fund, it may involve additional costs and changing investment options. But the changing retirement landscape and increased regulation have also placed a much greater responsibility on trustees to ensure members are well-looked after throughout their working life and during retirement. Gouws believes the best way to address the current challenges is to choose the right investment platform that allows flexibility of investments in a cost-effective and efficient manner. It should also allow members to invest their retirement contribution pre-retirement and to draw an income in retirement without having to switch between investment administration and product providers. This allows pension fund members to plan for their retirement in a consistent manner from the day they start saving, without having to change course once they reach retirement. An appropriate investment platform allows investors to preserve their benefits even when they change employers by moving it to a preservation fund, without having to incur additional costs or changing investment strategies, he adds. “The first prize is really creating a seamless retirement savings journey where someone can save from their first day of work until the day they retire, whilst also having access to the retirement products needed in retirement. This eliminates unnecessary costs related to the use of various investment platforms, strategies and asset managers.” Managing retirement funds from the same platform avoids a situation where someone has to transfer retirement benefits or reinvest retirement benefits at a time when the market is volatile and market timing becomes a material investment risk, Gouws adds. “Missing a few good days in the market can have a significant impact on your ultimate investment return.” Gouws says by choosing an appropriate platform, members have continuity of their preferred investment strategy, avoid unnecessary costs as well as the risk of moving their hard-earned retirement savings at the wrong time. Brought to you by Sasfin Wealth.