RYK VAN NIEKERK: Welcome to this Market Commentator podcast – my weekly podcast, where I speak to leading investment professionals. My guest today is Vanessa van Vuuren: she is a fund manager at Sanlam, and she looks after the Sanlam Small Cap Fund. Vanessa, welcome to the show. Small- and mid-caps are always interesting, it is the sector where the potential and the elusive so-called ‘ten baggers’ are – to use a Peter Lynch term. Ten baggers are stocks that jump ten times their value in a relatively short period and that’s the one you always want to chase. But I’m looking at the performance of the nine small- and mid-cap funds, which we have listed on the Moneyweb website, and the performance of these funds has been less than spectacular in recent times. What are the underlying reasons for this? VANESSA VAN VUUREN: Good morning, Ryk. I think you are spot on. It’s very, very tough and it’s reflected in the performance of the funds in the category, but if you look at the broader market it’s also synchronised with the high-level indices. I was just looking at some data this morning: the mid-cap index is down 10% year-to-date, of which the 4% of 8.6% has happened in this month of May, so it does seem to be coming to a bit of a head. But we have had a very, very tough performance across the small- and mid-cap space. Small caps are down about 4% year-to-date, so a little bit less than mid-caps. But if you just take a step back I think it’s really a function of the broader operating environment and the economy of South Africa and that’s the best way to describe it in a nutshell. If you look over the last four to five years there’s really been absolutely no impetus in terms of the demand growth. GDP growth has been largely negligible: 0% to 2%, 2% at best, 0% at worst, and that really hasn’t changed in the short term. So there’s a lot of expectation that’s going to change because of what’s happened in the political environment and so on, but we actually haven’t seen that happen on the ground. Many of the companies that we speak to – and we’ve just spoken to a whole lot now that we’re going into a new results season – are actually really, really struggling still. So until we see that change I can’t see the returns changing in the fund either; they have to basically follow a better environment for the underlying companies we invest in. RYK VAN NIEKERK: But is there a correlation between big stocks and small- and mid-cap stocks? We saw last year that the JSE did really well, but if you dissect it a bit it was actually only really Naspers that did really, really well. That gives you a perception that the market did well and then you look at an index like the small-cap sector and it didn’t perform so well. What is that correlations? VANESSA VAN VUUREN: It’s exactly what you are saying, there is actually much less correlation in the broader market now because of that impact of Naspers particularly. But also because if you look at the Top 40 and the large-cap shares, over 60% of the earnings of the companies in that index are now derived offshore. So when you’re investing in the Top 40 in South Africa or the large-cap stocks predominantly, you are actually buying global economic environments. So if you want to play the South African environment, then it’s definitely sitting in that small- and mid-cap space and that is then more reflected in our area of the JSE, where we haven’t seen our companies performing well. And even though we had quite a bit of a run up in some of the retailers, for example, with the ANC elections and the supposed ‘Ramaphoria’ that everyone is quoting, it hasn’t now materialised in practice on the ground with the latest numbers coming out from the actual companies. Hence, why the share prices are starting to fall very dramatically, because expectations haven’t materialised and the disappointment is setting back in. So the broader SA Inc complex I think is still very much under pressure and you won’t pick that up in the large cap stocks but you will pick it up in our small- and mid-cap stocks.  How will small caps be affected if there’s a correction? RYK VAN NIEKERK: We’ve also seen the valuations of the big counters are quite high and there’s talk of this nine-year bull market – the longest in recent history. But the small caps within that bull market didn’t perform as well. But if we do see a correction – and it’s a big if – the small caps will also be hit really hard. So are you concerned that the macro market conditions currently could affect small caps as severely as, for example, the large caps, if there is a correction? VANESSA VAN VUUREN: It’s an interesting point, because I think that definitely there will be a contagion effect. There’s no doubt that if there’s a capital outflow from equity markets that small- and mid-cap shares will not be unaffected by that, there will definitely be an impact. However, having said that, the valuations on our side of the market really are a lot more compelling and you can’t escape that fact. So, yes, we would be affected by a broad-based selloff, there’s no doubt, but I think then the opportunities would be even more pronounced in our space because even at the moment the valuation upside in a number of our shares is extremely material. There are very cheap entry points into some really decent quality businesses in our space. Just as a rough proxy we run an upside to intrinsic value calculation in our portfolio, what we believe our shares are worth versus what they are trading at today, and we’re getting around 70% upside – which is the highest upside we’ve had in eight years. So that’s telling me that there’s a lot of valuation upside in our shares and our shares are cheap. But I think to your point about a broad-based selloff, we won’t be unaffected by that and that will definitely be a risk to the whole equity market. RYK VAN NIEKERK: If I look at your small cap fund, your biggest shareholding is in Bowler Metcalf and Italtile and Cartrack. Why do you think these three shares are attractive? VANESSA VAN VUUREN: I’ve held Bowler for a really long time and a lot of the reason for holding that stock has actually played out in the very short term recently, where they invested in a soft drink asset, which they’re now going to unbundle and they are actually selling it to an external shareholder and there’s a lot of value realisation that’s coming out of that. But just aside from that, the underlying core plastics packaging business is very, very cheap and it remains a high quality play in a very tough market; the packaging business is a difficult industry. So that was the one reason. It’s a nice stable business: good cash flow, strong balance sheet, good returns on capital and nice dividend play. Then the other two, Cartrack for example, has had a phenomenal run, it seems to have been fairly immune from the macroeconomic dynamics that I have just described and really that’s just been a function of how they’ve grown. Their base is a much younger model in terms of its level of maturity. They’ve grown their subscriber base very aggressively and they’ve internationalised the business very tactfully on a contained basis, not aggressively to risk too much capital and they’ve been taking a lot of market share in South Africa. So it’s a really interesting story that separates it from what you see in the broader economic dynamics. A company like Italtile is a similar scenario; they have actually been under a little bit more pressure with the demand environment, where they’ve had some pressure on their sales because the South African consumer is weaker. But, again, a phenomenally run business in terms of how they extract possibility. They’re a fully integrated operator. [They have] good supply chain management in a very competitive and tough industry – tiles and sanitary ware – and a strong dominant market position that puts them in strong position, even when the environment gets tough for their operating environment.  Portfolio size RYK VAN NIEKERK: How many companies are in your portfolio? VANESSA VAN VUUREN: At the moment we’re sitting on about 45 companies. RYK VAN NIEKERK: How often do you trade? VANESSA VAN VUUREN: It’s very dependent on the opportunities we’re finding, so in the last few months or so we actually haven’t traded much at all – the portfolio has been fairly static. It really depends on your opportunity set. I think late last year we had some interesting opportunities and there was a lot of volatility in the market with what was happening in the political backdrop, so we picked up some interesting stocks late last year going into the earlier stages of this year. But typically our core top ten tends to be fairly stable. It will move more with the performance of the shares, as opposed to actively changing that. It’s really a function of the opportunity set in the market. So at the moment it’s been quite quiet. I do think now we are getting into a level where the mid-cap index has fallen so aggressively that we definitely are seeing some more opportunities. We saw something like Massmart fall 18% on Thursday in reaction to its trading update. These kinds of opportunities are going to be more interesting and we’ll definitely stay on top of those if we choose to trade them. RYK VAN NIEKERK: In the small- and mid-cap sector specifically, how many investible shares are there? VANESSA VAN VUUREN: It depends really on the size of assets that you’re managing, or the size of your fund. Our fund at the moment [is] sitting at about R500 million, so our fund is quite nimble and we can trade quite low down…. You get the small-cap index, you get the mid-cap index, you even get the fledgling index that’s below that with even smaller companies, so we pretty much can play any of those spaces. But if you are a big fund north of R1 billion or R2 billion you are a lot more constrained. You can invest definitely in the mid-cap universe, but in the small-cap universe you get to probably the bottom 20% or 30% of the index and it becomes a lot less investible and we would struggle even to buy some of those positions. There are some really illiquid stocks on the bottom end of the small cap index. RYK VAN NIEKERK: But are we talking tens. I know some other fund managers believe there are only 200 investible shares in South Africa. If you take out the Top 40 that leaves 160, 150. Is that a big enough sector for you to go and find 45 counters which you believe will do really well? VANESSA VAN VUUREN: Yes, definitely. If you look, the small- and mid-cap index are both 60 stocks, so that’s 120 already in that index and then you’ve got the fledgling index which is close to 80 stocks, so you already have over 200 in our space that we could select from. We’ve predominantly focused on the small- and mid-cap space, but we do have exposure to fledgling, so that’s a universe of 200 plus stocks and that doesn’t even include the AltX, which is a whole other universe of opportunities, another 30 or 40 stocks there. So I definitely don’t think the size of the universe is a constraint to us, but if you are a large asset manager with a big fund you would definitely be constrained by liquidity on the lower end.  How similar are small- and mid-cap funds? RYK VAN NIEKERK: I’m looking at the fund fact sheets of several other smal-l and mid-cap asset managers and you see the same names of some popular shares: Italtile, Cartrack, ADvTECH, Tsogo Sun is another one you see frequently, but amongst the other shares they are totally divergent. How similar are the small-cap and mid-cap funds to each other? VANESSA VAN VUUREN: That’s a very good question because I think they’re very, very different and it’s even reflected in the performance. You’ve got nine funds that are tracked in the universe and their performance is radically different – especially in the more recent couple of years we’ve seen big divergences in performance and that’s because you’ve got such a large universe. You can concentrate on the mid-cap side like a lot of the older more established funds have done, or you can choose to go more on the small-cap side, or you could even choose to go on the very small-cap side. So some of the funds are very concentrated, one fund has only got ten…in it, it’s a very concentrated fund. So it’s very divergent and because it’s such a big universe and such an under-researched universe, each person has to do their own individual research. They’re going to come up with a very different product than the Top 40 fund, where everybody knows let’s be overweight Sasol at the moment or BTI and so on, and everyone is converging in the same way. It’s a very different universe. RYK VAN NIEKERK: Do you look at what the other fund managers do? VANESSA VAN VUUREN: I think it’s an important risk overlay to look at retrospectively. I think it’s a difficult thing to try and chase in the short term because, firstly, there’s a data issue, so you’re not necessarily up to date and they could move in the short term that you wouldn’t be able to copy, for example. The other thing is I don’t think it’s an area where…because your research process is going to be very unique, you’re going to be focused on areas where you’re focused on. I don’t think it’s the kind of thing where if your competitor has a position in a big stock you just replicate that. I think you need to do your own work and your own research and form your own views. So I’m very loathe to look at competitors and try to replicate their portfolios; I don’t think it’s a good strategy in this space.  Steinhoff RYK VAN NIEKERK: Steinhoff could currently be regarded as a small cap, it has taken a real beating. Have you considered maybe putting a few rand in there? VANESSA VAN VUUREN: It has come into our universe, very regrettably at this stage. There are a lot of different views out there. I personally am not prepared to put capital into it at this stage on behalf of my clients, just because I think that we haven’t ascertained the full degree of what’s gone wrong in the business. So there’s speculation about what needs to be written down, the debt structures and so on, but the actual underlying fraud or misrepresentation that has happened hasn’t been unpacked or understood by any degree at this stage. So until I think you have that information and a complete worst case scenario information and understanding of exactly what happened, if we can ever actually get that, until that stage I wouldn’t want to buy this investment and I think there’s too much risk in it, given that problem.  Medium-term horizon looks positive RYK VAN NIEKERK: Many of the small caps are linked a lot more closely or are a lot more correlated to the performance of the local economy than larger international companies. We are still seeing pedestrian growth, but some of the analysts believe that we could see 1.7% to 2% growth this year. What do you think will be flow through to the share prices of the small caps and mid caps that are more linked to the local economy? VANESSA VAN VUUREN: Ryk, at this point it’s still very negative, as I’ve indicated. What we see on the ground, the actual granular performance of the companies is not improving in the near term and we do know the first quarter GDP is going to be very disappointing and weak, even though we had a positive surprise last quarter. But I think if you look a little bit more ahead of that I think all the building blocks are being put into place for a materially better environment for small- and mid-cap investing. So things like, for example, the political framework, that is a change in the last eight to ten years, where we have a new president, new potential focus, more investor-friendly hopefully and if some of the issues around corruption can be resolved it’s really, really good for the SA Inc companies. So I am feeling a lot more positive. I’ve been in the market for 15 years and this is the first time that I feel really, really confident about the potential future and I’m not saying the next six months – because I think it’s going to take a while and a lot of structural things have to happen – but the right moves are being made in order for us to hopefully have a better economic environment, better consumer confidence. All the confidence indicators are signaling improved mood, improved potential demand into the future – we just haven’t seen that materialise yet. So I would say it’s very positive over a medium-term horizon for small- and mid-cap shares, but actually on the ground short term it could take a while longer and we haven’t yet seen a change on the ground. So caution short term for long-term gain. I also think the caution short term is an opportunity, because we are getting opportunities to buy shares at these really attractive levels. So for an investor who’s coming in now at this stage, I think it’s a great point in time if you take a three- to five-year view on the macroeconomic environment. RYK VAN NIEKERK: On that positive note we’ll have to leave it there. Thank you, Vanessa. That was Vanessa van Vuuren, she’s a fund manager at Sanlam and she looks after the Sanlam Small Cap Fund.