ARABILE GUMEDE: Peter Davies is joining us in the studio now, SAA’s chief restructuring officer. I’m calling you the Captain Marvel to our situation here in South Africa, to our infinity wars at SAA. How bad is it, Peter? PETER DAVIES: Good morning. Well, it’s bad, ja. It’s public in terms of the state of the finances. I would say it’s a good airline but a bad business, and it’s been allowed to develop into some poor processes and procedures over many years through no one’s particular fault. It’s just a set of circumstances and it finds itself now losing heaps of money, providing good service, good… service to South Africa. But we need to fix it and fix it quickly. ARABILE GUMEDE:  How much longer will it take to get it back? Is 2021 realistic? PETER DAVIES:  It has to be, yes, of course. I think, from what I’ve seen so far, I’ve been here a few months now and I’ve gone through the details – first of all, the airline is quite fixable. That’s the key thing. We are quite confident we can make these changes. It’s a question of what we concentrate on first. There are so many different priorities. We have to prioritise in terms of making sure that we continue to apply… of paramount importance. But clearly we want to make a profit as quickly as possible, but also provide customer service. So we have to balance the requirements of an ageing fleet, significant tough competition globally at a time when obviously a lot of people have lost some faith in the airline. We are trying to rebuild that back with some additional benefits to our customers. So we are trying to concentrate on different fronts – improve the way in which we perform in terms of our customer, the way we can reduce our costs, we work with our staff. So there is a plethora of projects – over 200 in fact that we’ve identified that we need to tackle over the next two or three years. So, providing we price those correctly and we really concentrate, and everyone concentrates on making sure that the objective to realise that South African Airways can be profitable and should be profitable, then I see 2021 not really a problem. NASTASSIA ARENDSE:  How different is it from the other airlines you’ve worked with – Air Malta, for instance, which was also on the brink when you brought it back to life? I remember at the time you did an interview where you said it was a choice between cost-cutting or running out of business. And in that context, looking at the details of SAA, what are the ingredients for restructuring your turnaround? PETER DAVIES:  Well the airlines I’ve managed in turnarounds are very similar. They are all government-owned, state-owned. They find themselves having ignored the competition. We are in the 21st century now and everyone in the company, the staff, the unions, and our customers, have to understand that indeed the market has changed. In the case of Air Malta that’s exactly what happened. The European low-cost market is in essence no different to the low-cost market here in South Africa from a…perspective. I don’t think South African Airways has fully realised that, other than develop their subsidiary company, Mango, which has been hugely successful. We intend to continue their good fortune. So I think it’s a recognition of what’s happened in the market and cutting your cloth according to what it is the customer wants to see. Many of our intercontinental customers want to continue for us to provide a full service, and that’s what we are trying to do. The airlines are very similar. Our costs exceed our revenue. It’s as simple as that, and in our case it’s quite substantial. So we really have to understand where we can cut the cost because, while revenue needs to improve, our market is not a cost-plus, it’s a market demand. So whatever people are willing to pay is what we have to pay, so we have to make sure our operational processes, procedures, the way in which we employ people, how we employ them, how we promote ourselves in the market, are such that we are appealing to the audience, both here in South Africa and obviously globally, but at the same time making sure that we can earn more revenue that cost. It’s really not much more complicated than that. ARABILE GUMEDE:  Landing the plane is probably the hardest part. I remember the movie Sully – Captain Sullenberger telling everybody “brace for impact”. How much is this going to cost us? We keep talking about this turnaround strategy, but we need to brace for this massive impact. As far as the limit you are asking for is surely not the be-all and end-all. So how much impact, how do we need to take in? The deputy finance minister says R20 billion at least in order to break even by 2021. Is that your assessment? PETER DAVIES:  Yes, that’s the figure we have concluded. I think the balance sheet is in a very poor position. Certainly the amount of debt that we have can’t be serviced. We can’t make sufficient profits to cover the debt that we have in terms of interest payments. That doesn’t make sense from a balance-sheet perspective. We’ve been discussing with the government the fact that we need to put equity in as well as debt, so they need to improve the equity. And then they will earn their money by way of dividends rather than simply through interest rates. So the amount of R20 billion is the correct figure, indeed. ARABILE GUMEDE:  That makes you job still 100 times harder. You don’t perhaps have the trust of the public at this point in time. There is a sense from government as well that we don’t want to lose our credit rating any further, and issuing you with more money may do so. How do you work around that? PETER DAVIES:  That’s a valid point. I think that we’ve reached the point in the history of South African Airways where the management, through the CEO and the board, have been exceptionally honest in terms of really trying to identify where are the current problems from a balance-sheet point of view, where are the current problems in terms of the processes and procedures and relationships we have with all sorts of stakeholders, and what is it going to take to fix that. We’ve generated a plan that I believe has substantial legs. It’s very up-front, it’s very honest. We’ve set ourselves very specific milestones and we have a lot of convincing to do in the marketplace. I accept and take your point. The decisions we made earlier, for example, in terms of switching some of South African Airways aircraft to Mango to develop the low-cost market more aggressively under the Mango brand and the South African Airways brand, and the fact that we closed one of the London routes – those decisions are beginning to develop green shoots. We can see that in the numbers coming through and we are having negotiations, obviously, with all our union colleagues and other stakeholders, and that we are explaining to them. So I think you have to do this slice by slice. And if we can make progress, day by day, and prove that we are making progress, demonstrating that by numbers or by positive reaction, then I think we are going to be able to prove that we can turn this airline around. NASTASSIA ARENDSE:  Is a private-sector partner an option at this point? PETER DAVIES: I think all options have to be on the table. Clearly I’m not the shareholder, but the shareholder has to decide in terms of what it wants to do in the future. If we can’t service our debt from the balance sheet, then that requires equity and the shareholder has to decide where the equity is coming from. Either it comes from the taxpayer or it comes from another source. So that’s up to them. Clearly, I think that it’s already been discussed, the fact that we need to look for a strategic equity partner. What form that’s going to take I’m not in a position to say. But certainly I think we need to make sure that South African Airways, once we fix it, is allowed to blossom, and not be encumbered with perhaps some of the difficulties it had in the past. I’m not South African, I’m Welsh. One issue in my experience – as you mentioned, Air Malta, another government-owned airline I’ve been involved in – one of the fundamental problems is that it’s perceived to be a government department by the civil servants, and of course it’s not. We are in a very competitive environment. It’s a tough, dog-eat-dog business, the airline business globally – and that ought to have the restraint, if I can use that word correctly, of being perceived to be part of a government department. It… does cause problems. So I think what’s beginning to happen now, from my experience, having been here a few months, is that this government doesn’t perceive that to be the case. I think they have allowed us to develop into a company. That’s the reason why we’ve got the support you just mentioned in terms of the deputy finance minister. NASTASSIA ARENDSE:  Based on that then, do state-owned airlines work – is that still a viable model? I’ve read many articles written by quite a few journalists here in South Africa who advocate that SAA shouldn’t be government-owned. It should be allowed to be privatised. PETER DAVIES:  Very few government-owned airlines are successful, and many airlines that were government-owned are now private, and that’s been developing over the last 10 or 15 years. There are some exceptions where the country has a strategy of transportation or tourism where they feel the investment in the airline is necessary, even if they don’t make a profit, because the bigger picture is far more important for that economy. That’s not normally the case in South Africa. I think here is a different situation. But generally your answer is that now most of the governments over the last 10 to 15 years have sold on their national airlines. ARABILE GUMEDE:  Peter, the restructuring higher than getting an equity partner and getting somebody who is going to form part to help, particularly with the R20 billion which I don’t think Nhlanhla Nene personally is going to say we have, that must mean you must give some sort of benefit to that equity partner. Do you think there’s enough benefit in SAA to have somebody come in and say, yes, we will fund this airline? PETER DAVIES:  For sure. The air transportation industry is fundamentally important to the global economy. In fact, one could argue that the technical development in terms of the fuselage and engines and the way which we are able to fly aircraft around the world more and more non-stop has had a significant impact in terms of the global economy. So the relationship between a country and an airline or the airline industry is vitally important. Strategic conduit is clearly critical, both from a business point of view, obviously a leisure – particularly here in South Africa on the tourist side – and visiting friends and relatives. So it’s an intrinsic part of making sure that our country be successful. So don’t think we are making investments into airlines, we are also making investments in that network and those countries to which they go. So the global feel and the relative importance of an airline is critical, and people see that as a good investment. Now it is true that the returns on some airlines are not fantastic, and particularly South African Airways is that. But it’s never been allowed to execute or implement the many reports which I’m sure have been made public over the years, and a number of CEOs. It’s a litany of events. Again, that’s not unusual. I’ve seen that before. But I think this time we need to make a difference. We need to create that situation in everyone in South Africa, every stakeholder. Perhaps just this time, just this once we can make a difference. ARABILE GUMEDE:  Are you happy with the management team? PETER DAVIES:  Yes. They are very passionate, they are very focused, they are experienced; they need leadership, they need direction, obviously, like any management team. It’s about pulling your troops through, not pushing them. ARABILE GUMEDE:  Sure. So we can call you guys The Avengers? [All chuckle] NASTASSIA ARENDSE:  Let’s talk about competition. Back in the day SAA was a monopoly, so it thrived because of restrictions and sanctions, etc. But, as the market changed, we saw a lot of the Middle-Eastern airlines coming in and eating SAA’s lunch, for lack of a better expression. Is it able to compete after you’ve fixed the basics that we need to be spending on it? PETER DAVIES:  It has to. Absolutely has to. And I agree with the competition clearly, we’ve got gulf carriers, and more recently Ethiopian and  Turkish, have substantially taken market share away from South African Airways. Is that because of the competition? I have two views. One is I’ve always felt that the principal competitor for the airline is the airline itself. I think if we want to bury our head in the sand, we are quite capable of doing that, and add a bit of cement The other argument I’d put forward is that while the gulf carriers and other airlines seem to be spoiling our party, the reality is in fact that have increased the size of the market. They’ve substantially improved the number of people flying from A to B for all sorts of different reasons, and therefore we should take advantage of that, and South African Airways has not been in a position to take advantage of that. So I think if we can turn the airline around, make ourselves more appealing to the buying public, then I think we have every opportunity of making sure that we can fight the competition quite stiffly. ARABILE GUMEDE:  You have put in quite a few changes. You have spoken about the particular London route, taking some of the planes themselves to Mango. What’s next? What’s the next big thing that needs to change? A system, a process? Something that needs to get better for SAA to show again that it’s well on its way profitability. PETER DAVIES:  What we need to do is reduce our costs inside the company. Our maintenance and– ARABILE GUMEDE:  Is that job cuts I’m hearing now? PETER DAVIES:  It’s about processes and procedures. We have to make sure – for example, our maintenance and repair organisation as a percentage of airline revenue is double that of what one would have expected. So our competition are paying 10%, we are paying over 20%. So these are big chunks of money, these are big processes and procedures which need to change. They’ve been allowed to develop over the years without significant financial parameters. We need to change that. So there’s a raft of things, there is no one single silver bullet here. This is down at the coalface; we are really chipping away at every single cent that we spend. PETER DAVIES:  Peter, it’s really been great chatting to you. Thank you so much. We’ve got through a lot that really answers where exactly SAA will go.