Richemont’s preference not to give the market guidance may explain why the share price was sent tumbling 3.78% to R118.88 on Friday in reaction to its announcement of a 1% increase in profit to €1.2 billion in the year to March. There were a number of reasons for the worse-than-expected performance, including that it spent €203 million in the 2018 financial year (and €278 million in the prior year) buying back its own stock from its retail partners. This contentious strategy is aimed at reducing oversupply in the market and protecting its own brands from being sold cheap or finding their way onto the grey market. Underlying sales and earnings figures confirm that the strategy, while it is expensive and has not been adopted universally in the industry, may be proving beneficial in the long term. Richemont, which makes Cartier, IWC watches, Piaget, Baume & Mercier and Montblanc luxury goods, grew sales by 3% at actual rates and by 8% at constant rates to €10.98 billion, with a strong retail performance offsetting a poor wholesale performance. Double-digit sales in mainland China, Hong Kong, Korea and Macau, and strong jewellery sales following the 2016 inventory buybacks, confirm the wisdom of the buybacks, executives said on Friday. Operating profit grew by 5%, with operating expenses confined to 2%, but a buyback-related charge of €135 million and adverse currency effects drove down its margin. Chairman Johann Rupert, who was noticeably absent from the podium at the group’s analysts’ presentation, said in the results announcement that operating profit would have increased 10% excluding one-off items. Johann Rupert, founder and chairman of Richemont SA. Picture: Chris Ratcliffe/Bloomberg The results reflect a strong retail and a soft wholesale performance and a mix of sales growth geographically with sales in Asia, its biggest market comprising 40% of sales, up 17%. In Europe, its second-largest sales market, sales dropped 2%, while it recorded positive growth in its other markets. At constant exchange rates, retail sales increased 14% while wholesale sales dropped 1%, with the contribution of retail sales, through online stores and 1 123 boutiques, increasing from 60% to 63% of group sales. When retail demand is strong, as it is currently, given a time gap, wholesale follows, chief finance officer Burkhart Grund said. Jewellery sales grew strongly to comprise 34% of total sales, while watch sales were lower. The issue of buybacks continue to dominate analysts’ reaction to results. Buybacks are costly and have been going on for years, perhaps longer than they anticipated, but are starting to have a positive longer-term effect. The jewellery buybacks in 2016 have normalised stock levels and sales at jewellery maisons have benefitted. Grund said jewellery had a strong year, with margins back to 30%. Richemont can buy back, or goods will find their way into the grey market and this affects long-term brand equity, Grund said. “Our view is probably different to other players,” he said, but last year’s buybacks at Cartier have resulted in it being in a healthy situation. This year it addressed a similar issue with its retail partners at specialist watchmakers and they have now reached healthy inventory levels. PSG portfolio manager Adrian Cloete said there were less buybacks this year than last. Some competitors have not done buybacks and have left their channels overstocked. “Richemont’s retail channels aren’t overstocked, so it is doing the right thing. If they hadn’t done this, they could have shown nice sales growth which is effectively not real. “I think it will [have] much less of an impact going forward, and it is good they are acting responsibly while some of their peers haven’t.” Richemont is increasing its presence in the soft luxury market. Its acquisition of full control of online luxury retailer Yoox Net-A-Porter (YNAP), which is an open neutral platform selling Richemont’s and other companies’ products, exposes the group to soft luxury products, but this was not the overriding reason. Grund said YNAP will leapfrog Richemont “into a new age” on the distribution side. It will bring e-commerce sales from only 1% of group sales to 17%. Some customers are asking for it, and Richemont is providing, and Richemont sees YNAP as one of the best opportunities to scale up quickly in e-commerce. Net-A-Porter packaging sits at the company’s head office in London. Picture: Matthew Lloyd/Bloomberg Analysts voiced concern over YNAP’s performance and business model, but Grund said it has strong management, very strong teams and size wise, is one of the best or leading assets in the digital arena. Richemont believes it is a good investment proposition. Richemont’s balance sheet remains strong. Its net cash flow from operations increased by €827 million to €2.7 billion and it had net cash of €5.3 billion at the end of the financial year, lower than the previous year due to the acquisition of investment properties and a stake in travel retail specialist, Dufry. In March Richemont raised €4 billion in a bond issue to fund the development of its businesses. Executives are reluctant to give guidance, and none is given. Rupert said in the results announcement that the long-term approach “does not preclude us from targeting strategic investments and divestments”. Organically, it sees significant potential to grow the leather goods business, while the YNAP acquisition is almost complete, with Richemont owning 95%. Grund acknowledged that once-off items, a feature of results for the past three years, are not ideal and make reading the results difficult. He hoped to do less of it. The market is not impressed at the moment, but that doesn’t mean it is not a good company. “It’s a fantastic business,” Cloete said, adding that it has not much competition in the jewellery segment while the watch segment is coming out of a tough period. Asian sales are up strongly, and Richemont is a nice play on the wealth effect in China.  It is well-managed with high cash levels. Nevertheless, results were obviously below analysts expectations, and the share price tells it all.