Here’s what caught our attention on Thursday: 1. Star divorces Steinhoff Steinhoff Africa Retail (Star) have managed to raise R18 billion via South African financial institutions to pay R16 billion in shareholders’ funding (which was provided by Steinhoff AG), simultaneously divorcing Steinhoff. Star is no longer under Steinhoff AG, but is an independently-financed firm. Moneyweb reported that the additional R2 billion will be used to pay off Steinhoff shareholder funding, and to finance Star’s future growth. 2. Famous Brands results Food franchising company Famous Brands reported a revenue increase of 23% to R7 billion, from R5 billion in 2017, for the financial year ended February 28 2018. Operating margin is up 12 .7%, headline earnings per share are however down by 8% to 393 cents. According to the company, trading conditions were challenging and highly competitive in its Africa and Middle East and UK regions. The board resolved that no dividend will be declared for the period. 3. Tiger Brands results Under the spotlight following the listeriosis outbreak, Tiger Brands said it had a slow start to the financial year. For the six months ended March 31 2018, revenue declined 4% to R15.7 billion, operating income declined 8% to R2 billion, headline earnings per share fell 16% to 868 cents, with an interim dividend of 378 cents per share (unchanged) declared. Although core domestic food businesses have delivered a steady performance, Tiger Brands said the rehabilitation of work continues at its value-added meat product facilities. 4. Auditor General comments on municipalities The Auditor-General (AG) expressed its disappointment with municipalities on Wednesday. It said that the number of municipalities with clean audits decreased from 48 over the 2015/2016 period to 33, while the AG received 112 unqualified audit reports this year, up from 108 in the previous financial year. Additionally, the AG highlighted that irregular expenditure in metros increased by 75% to R28.3 billion, while wasteful expenditure increased to R1.5 billion. The AG added that there’s a lack of decisive leadership to address accountability, Moneyweb reported. 5. Interest rate decision The South African Reserve Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee will on Thursday announce its interest rate decision. Economists forecast that the interest rate will be unchanged at 6.5%  as the CPI increased to 4.5% on Wednesday. Update to follow.