Mid-tier mining and construction materials group Afrimat is considering two opportunities where they are the only bidders to international investors who just want to get out of the South African mining sector. According to Afrimat CEO Andries van Heerden, international investors are extremely nervous about property rights and policy uncertainty in the mining sector. This has opened up some opportunities for Afrimat and it has, in fact, made an offer on one acquisition, which is currently being considered by the owners abroad. If accepted, it could be finalised in the current financial year, Van Heerden said. Van Heerden spoke at the release of Afrimat’s results for the year ended February 28. The group reported a 10.3% increase in revenue to R2.5 billion and an 8% drop in headline earnings per share to 180.7c. It declared a final dividend of 42c per share, which brings the total dividend for the year to 62c per share. The share price was unchanged on Thursday at R28.11 per share. Over the last six months it gained 1.1% and over the last year it lost 5.67% in value. Van Heerden said the reporting period was characterised by difficult trading conditions, but Afrimat’s diversified business model served it well. Traditionally Afrimat produced aggregates for the construction industry and concrete products. It has in recent years, however, diversified to the production of higher-margin industrial minerals and, more recently, commodities. The group has more than 40 mining licences and its operations are spread throughout South Africa and Mozambique. The move into commodities with the acquisition of Diro Manganese and Diro Iron Ore was aimed at diversification into dollar-based products. The operation is situated next to Kumba Iron Ore’s Sishen mine and is aimed at export through the Saldanha harbour. During the reporting period the aggregates and industrial minerals segment contributed 64.4% of group revenue. Van Heerden said Afrimat is still closely linked to the construction industry where activity levels dropped as politics impacted the rollout of infrastructure projects. He said industrial minerals performed well across all regions. The concrete-based products segment contributed 25.4% to revenue after being impacted by market conditions, Van Heerden said. In its first year the commodities segment contributed 10.2% to group revenue. Van Heerden sees this as the group’s primary growth area. Afrimat bought Demaneng out of business rescue and decided to accelerate the ramp-up to capitalise on the improved iron ore price. This resulted in increased expenses. The mine reached it design production capacity of one million tons per annum at the end of February and it was all systems go. A number of derailments however impacted Transnet’s ability to transport the iron ore to Saldanha and Afrimat had to scale back operations by giving notice to contractors. Currently, the operations have been restored to a level of 60% and Van Heerden hopes to have full Transnet capacity back by September or October. There is no other way to get the iron ore for the export market to Saldanha, Van Heerden said. He said Demaneng mine has a premium product that fetches a premium price. The group initially planned to export the total production, but is now working on a target of 20% for the domestic market. While Afrimat is concerned about policy uncertainty in the mining industry it has good relationships with the Department of Mineral Resources. It is also fairly well placed with regard to transformation, he said. The group is concerned about possible requirements in the Mining Charter with regard to empowerment of local communities. If local communities refer to those living around the mine, it can become very difficult for a small mining company to manage the expectations, Van Heerden says. He said there was a very interesting space between the big mining houses and small “rough and tumble” operations for a mid-tier miner like Afrimat. The group has a good skills base and could diversify into other commodities like coal, he said. The South African economy is currently in a very difficult space and construction is a good indicator, Van Heerden said. He said that while construction work seemed to bypass listed contractors for some time, even the smaller companies were struggling as government spending went elsewhere over the last two years. He does not expect an upturn in construction or the broader economy in the next 12 to 18 months. In fact indicators like building plans passed show that construction activity might taper down even more in the short term, Van Heerden said.