Here’s what caught our attention on Tuesday. 1. African Bank results The financial results for African Bank for the six months ended March 31 2018 show an increase in operating profit before tax to R123 million from R83 million in 2017, while profit for the period also increased to R77 million, from R53 million last year. The CEO, Basani Maluleke, said in a statement on Sens that African Bank had progressed in its strategy to digitise the business and modernise the branch network. 2. SAA confirms appointment of tainted CA State-owned airline South African Airways has confirmed that it appointed Robert Newsome as its head of risk and compliance at the beginning of May. Newsome, who is a chartered accountant by profession, is facing charges for failing to declare a conflict of interest in a matter relating to the SAA. During a disciplinary hearing, the South African Institute of Chartered Accountants asked Newsome to contribute R100 000 to legal costs if found guilty. Newsome pleaded not guilty, saying the matters were not related. Read more on this story here. 3. R250m in Gupta assets unfrozen The High Court ruled on Monday that the National Prosecuting Authority could not prove that the Gupta family illicitly received funds from state-funded Estina dairy project and could not justify reason for seizing the family’s assets worth R250 million during a raid in April. As a result, the judge ruled that the state would have to pay legal fees incurred by the Guptas, Bloomberg reported. 4. Eskom works on plan to boost economic growth Power utility Eskom has confirmed to Moneyweb that it is developing a design for an energy-intensive industry tariff suite in order to boost economic growth as well as ensure that the industry is sustainable in the long-term. Eskom’s first deal for a discount tariff was with Silicon Smelter plants, a second application with Sublime Technologies is awaiting approval. Moneyweb reported that if the application is approved Sublime Technologies will be able to preserve jobs while using Eskom’s excess capacity. 5. Star results Steinhoff Africa retail (Star) released its results for the six months ended March 31 2018, in which it reports a 10.2% increase in revenue to R33.0 billion, a 9.0% increase in operating profit to R3.3 billion and a 12.2% increase in headline earnings per share. The retailer also reported that it raised R18 billion in order to refinance shareholders. The company resolved no dividend will be paid for the period. Read: Creating distance between Star and Steinhoff