Old Mutual Limited (OML) is feeling the effects of ‘Ramaphoria’, the wave of positive sentiment driven by Cyril Ramaphosa’s presidency, as it schmoozes investors ahead of its listing in London and Johannesburg. The newly-formed South African holding company, a product of Old Mutual Plc’s (PLC) “managed separation” in which the Anglo-South African insurance group is breaking up into four stand-alone businesses, is due to list on June 26. At the time of listing, OML will hold Old Mutual Emerging Markets assets, PLC’s residual interests and its 54% stake in Nedbank, which will soon be unbundled to a minority 19.9% stake. Its UK-based counterpart Quilter, formerly Old Mutual Wealth, will list in both cities a day earlier. The managed separation – first announced in 2016 – is being mooted as a mechanism to unlock the conglomerate discount, from which PLC suffers and creates value for shareholders. Upon separation, shareholders in PLC will receive one share in Quilter and roughly three shares in OML for every three PLC shares currently held. At this stage, foreign index fund managers who held PLC and do not have a mandate to invest in emerging market stocks are expected to sell their newly-acquired shares in OML. It is widely expected that emerging market fund managers and MSCI Index participants will pick up the OML stock that comes to market. Currently, the teams at Quilter, OML and Nedbank are meeting with fund managers, talking up their prospects. Bruce Hemphill, chief executive of PLC, said current talks related to the South Africa-focused business are benefitting from improved sentiment and business confidence after Ramaphosa took office. “Our job has been made easier by what happened in December last year,” he said referring to the ANC’s elective conference in which Ramaphosa was appointed party leader and set in motion plans for him to assume the presidency. Although questions about the future of the country and its structural issues remain, he said investors evaluating South Africa in relation to its emerging market peers, are taking comfort in Ramaphosa’s leadership. “What has changed is that people are saying ‘we have someone with credibility, someone who can be trusted and who is doing the right things’. South Africa has all the ingredients to be successful, if led by people who adopt that approach.” Based on his interactions, he said investors are generally more positive about South Africa. According to him, those who are familiar with Old Mutual understand that is a good business and want to get into the nuts and bolts of newly-formed companies, by way of engagement with management and through the pre-listing statements. Ramaphosa’s presidency has sent business and consumer confidence skyrocketing and led to upward revisions in asset prices such as banking stocks. But Hemphill said that it was too early to tell whether this sentiment had filtered through to the activities of consumer financial service products and the group’s domestic operations.