This is a brief history of the old, the forgotten, and the dispossessed. Pensioners should be seen and not heard, even if they are struggling, and battling to put food on the table. After all, their lifespan is diminishing. Macabre? This is how the Transnet pensioners have been treated since 2003. Is this a foreboding of the future – that of looted pension funds, and struggling pensioners? That employees may battle to make promises stick? Is this an indication of how workers are going to be treated when they are no longer economically useful? Or is this merely another example of a state-owned entity behaving badly? To briefly recap the past – when, in 1990, the SA Transport Services was converted into a company, Transnet SOC Ltd, two defined benefit funds were inherited from the South African Railways and Harbours Administration. These funds were merged into the Transport Pension Fund. In 2000 the Transnet Second Defined Benefit Fund was created to house the pensioner members of the Transport Fund. These funds fall under the Transnet Pension Act, and are therefore not subject to the Pension Funds Act, nor are they subject to supervision by the Financial Services Board. It should be noted that guaranteed benefit funds, which fall under the Pension Funds Act, are mandated to distribute any fund surplus to members. This does not apply to these Transnet Funds. The pensioners were assured that there would be no change to their pension benefits. As they understood it, the annual increase would be 2% plus an increase to take inflation into account. This is what came to be referred to as ‘the promise’. This was kept until 2003, after which the annual increases were no more than 2%. Inflation shot up to 4.82% in 2006, reaching 7.57% in 2007 and 9.35% in 2008. It has remained high, coming down slightly to 4.50% in 2017. During the years, these pensioners had to make do with paltry 2% increases. “Bonuses” were occasionally dished out, but it has not been possible to quantify the impact. In 2014 two pensioners, Pretorius and Kapa, were granted the right to represent the pensioners of these two funds in a class action lawsuit against the Transport Pension Fund (TPF) and the Transnet Second Defined Benefit Pension Fund (the funds). However, the case heard in the Pretoria High Court in 2016, was about exceptions. The objective of an exception is to dispose of the case or a portion thereof in a timely manner. The pensioners only achieved a partial victory. Leave to appeal was denied in the High Court and the Supreme Court. This matter was heard by the Constitutional Court in April 2018, and the pensioners were granted the right to appeal the High Court judgment. The pensioners have made the following claims: Transnet and the funds raised exceptions to the arguments but the ConCourt dismissed them and ruled that it does not deprive the respondents of the opportunity to raise [arguments] as “substantive defences in their respective pleas”. The ConCourt also ruled that unlawful state action, unfair labour practice, and the breach of contract are all constitutional matters. Transnet has failed to pay this amount over to the funds. The exceptions raised by the funds and Transnet were not allowed by the High Court. The exceptions raised by the funds and Transnet were not allowed by the High Court. Final outcome far off The full legal arguments and counter arguments, supported by all the facts, still have to proceed to court. The constitutional principles of reliance, accountability and rationality will be fleshed out. The court will have to decide on the fundamental social security rights, pensioner expectations and legitimate expectation. That the ConCourt clarified the employer-employee relationship in regard to pensioners, and held that “Labour law jurisprudence under the Labour Relations Act recognises that unfair labour practices under the act may extend beyond the termination of employment” and opined that the facts of this case “provide a compelling basis not to restrict the protection of section 23 (fair labour practice rights) to only those who have contracts of employment”, will be scant relief. It will also be scant relief that important legal principles on these highly complex issues may ultimately be developed when this case is heard. For an impoverished ageing pensioner, all they comprehend is a broken promise, and not enough money. It will take many years before this matter is finally resolved. By then, many pensioners will have passed on. Can Transnet not simply do the right thing and settle with the pensioners? Does one really need jurisprudence to rule on such a matter?