Here’s what caught our attention on Thursday: 1. Murray & Roberts and Aveng potential merger Construction company Murray & Roberts announced via Sens on Thursday that it plans to make a formal offer to Aveng shareholders. Both companies say they are positive about the strategic rationale and proposed terms, and are currently in the process of conducting due diligence. M&R’s board of directors says it is supportive of Aveng’s proposed rights offer and sale of non-core assets. 2. Taste Holdings to report disappointing performance Fast-food franchise owner Taste Holdings is expected to release its results for the year ended February 28 2018 on Thursday. In a trading statement, dated May 23, the owner of Starbucks and Domino’s said it expected its loss per share to be between 49.7 cents and 52.3 cents, a decrease of between 85% and 95%. It also expects a headline loss per share to be between 40.6 cents and 43.1 cents per share – a decline of between 62% and 72%. Update to follow. 3. Producer price inflation figures The producer price inflation (PPI) rose to 4.4% in April year-on-year, compared to 3.7% in March. 4. Alexander Forbes trading update Investments and insurance solutions company Alexander Forbes said in trading statement on Thursday that, for the financial year ending March 31, profit from operations is expected increase between 4% and 6% to R977 million and R995 million. Headline earnings are expected to decrease between 15% and 20% to R546 million and R580 million, from R683 million In 2017. Earnings per share for the period are expected to fall between 16.1 cents and/or 21.8 cents per share. Results will be released on June 11. 5. PIC CEO’s potential suspension The CEO of the Public Investment Corporation (PIC) Daniel Matjila could be facing suspension, following an investigation by the PIC into his investment dealings. Bloomberg is reporting that the PIC is investigating if Matjila followed proper procedure when the PIC spent R4.3 billion in an initial public offering to Ayo Technology Solutions. Additionally, questions are being raised about Matjila’s role in the PIC’s decision to invest in VBS Bank and Resilient Reit, both of which are facing their own regulatory battles.