Last July, I wondered aloud whether Famous Brands’ “transformational” acquisition – the UK’s GBK – would be an engine of growth or an expensive distraction? Based on trading to date, it’s turning out to be the latter. The September 2016 deal fundamentally changed the company’s business model, as it was now a sizeable operator of restaurants (versus just a franchisor before). In the year to end-February, the GBK business generated R1.5 billion of revenue – nearly double the franchising and development revenue of R851 million it earned locally. The problem is that this SA business is fabulously profitable (with historical margins well north of 50%), while running restaurants in the UK is, quite simply, not at all profitable (at least not currently). Earlier this month, Famous Brands announced it would book an impairment totalling R372.6 million related to GBK. This included a R69 million write-down on property, plant and equipment as well as a R304 million one on intangible assets. It also raised a R33 million provision for property-related expenses. This doesn’t include the R100 million-plus of one-off (“non-operational”) items that were charged through the income statement last year (or the impact of a stronger rand). And, don’t forget the R251 million in finance costs in FY18. All of this helped turn a R890 million operating profit into a R270 million profit before tax (from R690 million last year). GBK is no longer worth the £120 million (then R2.1 billion) Famous Brands paid for it. But, GBK is not fundamentally broken (at least, it does not seem to be). It remains the premium burger market leader in the UK, with 106 stores (as at end February). And, according to a national survey cited by Famous Brands, it is the nation’s clear favourite burger restaurant (with 31.5% of respondents). Sales were up in the year (4.9%), however, on a like-for-like basis these were down 6.8%. It opened 10 new stores in the last 12 months – only just sustaining its publicly-stated plan at the time of the purchase “to continue opening ten to 15 restaurants a year in the UK” (surely the result of a pipeline that was impossible to change without incurring unnecessary costs). But, this will come to a near standstill with only two openings planned for this year. Source: Famous Brands The problems In its presentation to investors last week, Famous Brands provided detailed insights into the market and summed up the problem as four “adverse forces”: consumer confidence, competitor incursion, customer advocacy and the market shift to online delivery. The four explained in the presentation could in actual fact be summed up as just three: consumer confidence, competition and online delivery. The prolonged slump in British consumer confidence following the Brexit vote has affected the entire category (and retail in general). Customers have become more “price sensitive and value conscious”. Of course, it doesn’t help that the premium burger category is easily seen as “expensive”. And, pure fast food players (think McDonald’s and Burger King) have shifted to “value” making the difference even more stark. Competition in the category is intense. By Famous Brands’ estimates, the number of premium burger restaurants in the UK has nearly doubled from 213 in 2014 to 401 in 2017. US chain Five Guys has been the most aggressive, quadrupling its store base over that period. It has close to 90 stores in the UK at present. GBK has been helped by major competitor Byron entering a company voluntary arrangement (not dissimilar to business rescue in SA). It has closed a number of its underperforming stores and it is speculated it may close as many as 20 of its footprint of 70. Source: Famous Brands Far more concerning is the structural shift in the UK market towards online delivery. The compound annual growth rate of the chain restaurant delivery market is 25% since 2014. But, six out of ten Britons cite delivery time as the main criteria for choosing a takeaway option and it is here that GBK suffers. Famous Brands highlights that its burgers “take 10 minutes longer to prepare due to higher quality standards” (it cooks to order). The solutions Two of the three factors can be responded to on a strategic and operational level (there’s not much anyone can do about deteriorating consumer confidence, but to trade through it). Famous Brands expects to close six “distressed” sites this year as part of a “targeted closure programme”. With only two openings planned in the next 12 months, we can expect its footprint to settle at just over 100 stores, for now. This will have material impacts given that the capital costs to open a restaurant are steep, averaging £1 million per store. Rather, it will reinstitute a refurbishment and facelift programme. On the operational front, it will simplify its menu design and pricing as well as focus on (read: fix) the customer experience. It needs customers to influence others to eat GBK burgers. While the market is not likely to get any less competitive, the rollout of stores by Five Guys is slowing and Byron’s travails are helpful. GBK will play catch-up in the online delivery space too, and will launch delivery options with multiple platforms (from one to three, depending on the market). Famous Brands cites a case study where restaurants have rolled out on multiple online delivery vendors: delivery turnover grew by 44% to 48% in the five months to end-January. GBK has opened three trial “dark store” concept stores, which are purely delivery focused (no traditional bricks and mortar shopfront exists). Famous Brands says “sales have been steady and in line with expectations”. Management maintains it “remains optimistic about the medium-term potential of the business”. But, it needs to get it profitable first. While not (yet) a complete disaster, GBK has become a significant drag on the business. Profits, margins and the dividend have all suffered. One wonders what shape the group would’ve been in without the unnecessary management distraction (and debt). No South African brand has ‘made it’ in the UK (not Spur, not Steers, not Wimpy). Was GBK a deal to make it in that market at almost any price? We’ll see. Hilton Tarrant can still be contacted at hilton@moneyweb.co.za.