In the 1990s an entrepreneurial teacher in Durbanville took a bold decision to start his own school. In the hall of the NG Kerk Bergsig, he offered classes to 28 learners in an environment that would be privately run and managed. Private schooling wasn’t anything new in South Africa, but affordable private schooling was rare. This was the teacher’s goal – to offer an excellent education at a reasonable price in a growing urban area. He believed he had spotted a need because the new ANC government’s focus was naturally on schools in townships and rural areas that had been neglected for decades. There was therefore an opportunity to offer schooling to urban families who wanted to ensure their children received a high standard of education. That teacher was Chris van der Merwe, the founder of Curro. His company has become one of South Africa’s greatest success stories of the last two decades. At the end of 2017 the group had 51 campuses, housing 124 schools and accommodating more than 45 000 learners. While it would be inaccurate to say that state education has failed entirely in South Africa, it is clearly a major problem. There are some excellent public schools in different parts of the country, but the government has been unable to correct the decline in many areas and has been unable to provide enough capacity on its own to meet the demand for quality schooling. This has created the opportunity for the private sector to offer a service that was traditionally the preserve of the state. Curro’s remarkable growth is clear evidence that there is plenty of room for these kinds of synergies. Speaking at an event hosted by Investec Asset Management, the group’s CFO, Bernardt van der Linde, argued that it makes sense for the government’s role to be to only provide services where the private sector does not. In terms of education in South Africa, that means in rural areas, where the demand is greatest, but infrastructure is poorest. In urban areas, the need for new schools can be met by companies such as Curro, that are able to provide the service at increasingly affordable rates. Van der Linde said that they are looking at the possibility of opening schools that may set fees as low as R1 000 a month. In a country where service delivery is a constant issue, greater involvement from the private sector simply makes sense. South Africa’s private hospitals are another very obvious example. Government healthcare has been under enormous pressure for a long time, but the country’s private facilities are among the best in the world. For both patients and shareholders, they have been enormously successful. These private services are sometimes criticised as being elitist and inaccessible to the majority of the population, but that ignores the reality that the state has failed to provide the level of schooling or healthcare that a decent chunk of the population wants. If the private sector can do so, this actually supports the government’s objectives to provide universal education and healthcare. There are also other areas where poor delivery by the state has created opportunities for private sector players. Energy Partners, which like Curro has PSG as a major investor, was born out of the load-shedding crisis of the late 2000s. It provides energy solutions to businesses and homes to make them less reliant on Eskom-supplied power. The CEO of the company, Karel Cornelissen, told attendees at the Investec event that he believes this is a trend happening all over the world. The provision of utilities is moving from a centralised model to a decentralised one. As it is becoming increasingly affordable and practical for people to generate their own electricity, more will naturally do so. This makes those than can afford to do so less reliant on the state, but also allows the state to focus more of its resources on providing services to those who really need their support. The Cape Town water crisis has been a microcosm of exactly this. Those who have the resources to do so have sunk boreholes and bought storage tanks. Many people have decreased their use of municipal water to almost zero. The city has however continued to subsidise water to poor households, many of which pay nothing at all. There are many other areas where similar private-sector solutions can be explored. Energy Partners itself is looking at the potential in water, waste-to-energy and electrical storage. The state doesn’t have the capacity to do everything for everyone. Where the private sector can step in is hugely beneficial to the country, as it frees up state resources to be focused where they are most needed. It is a practical and efficient way of wealth distribution. It’s also a great opportunity for entrepreneurs.