The meltdown of Steinhoff International’s share price in the wake of an accounting scandal should be a “trumpet call” for the South African investment market. This is according to Nigel Morriss, head of operational risk for the IMETA (India, Middle East, Turkey and Africa), region at Mercer. “Institutional investors are not doing enough to safeguard their assets. Prudent investors do not look at manager research and manager selection in isolation, but they consider it in line with industry-leading, deep operational due diligence,” he says. Although the recent Steinhoff accounting scandal has been painful for many retail as well as institutional investors, the hope is that it will be a “wake-up call” for investors to join the rest of the world in taking operational due diligence seriously. Morriss says investors’ focus is typically on returns on capital. As a result, they spend a lot of time researching managers and strategies in the hope of maximising returns. This often happens in isolation. “We believe that a prudent and prescient institutional investor doesn’t allocate to an investment manager (and how they manage an investment strategy) on the basis of performance returns in isolation.” There is very little value in portfolio managers spending all the resources of their front office in trying to generate alpha, if this process doesn’t also take the operational risks into account, he argues. But what exactly are operational risks? Operational risks are discreet, often hidden risks that pose unique challenges to the effective management of assets and portfolios. These risks are not always obvious and require specialist skills in conducting an operational risk assessment, Morriss says. “The whole purpose of a comprehensive approach to operational risk management is that we seek to minimise alpha erosion.” Morriss says there is greater peace of mind for the investor if they spend the relatively small amount of money completing a full due diligence – which includes operations– before investing as this can highlight red flags and risks by identifying gaps in their current processes, controls, governance and systems. The graphic below highlights some of the high-profile due diligence failures in recent history that have resulted in significant losses for investors.  Source: Mercer Financial Services Middle East In the case of Bernie Madoff’s Ponzi scheme, the stock and securities fraud amounted to roughly $50 billion. “Nobody ever asked the question in [the] Madoff [case]: Where are the assets? Nobody ever independently was asked to prove the existence of the assets. That is a key role of operations and that is why we say operations must always be segregated from the investment function. There was nobody looking at audit with Madoff. If there was an independent internal audit function, these major discrepancies would have been picked up.” But would an operational due diligence process really guard investors against the losses associated with the Steinhoff – and more recently Resilient – issues? Morriss says although a comprehensive operational due diligence exercise conducted by an independent third-party, will raise red flags and identify operational risks, there are no guarantees. “[These processes] likely won’t identify every risk, but they are certainly going a long way to identifying a majority of risks that can be mitigated.” At the same time, these processes have to be revised continuously, he argues. Whilst the operational infrastructure, governance and controls may have been appropriate ten years ago, it does not mean that it will be appropriate in 2018 as new risks will emerge due to the evolving nature of the financial services landscape. One of the big revelations around Steinhoff (and other similar cases) has been that investors are relying on the fact that these companies are listed on the JSE, which require a certain level of governance and financial statement disclosures, adds Mark Lindhiem, head of strategy at Alexander Forbes Investments. “If there is a pure reliance on that, then clearly, that is no longer good enough.” Lindhiem says investors should not only be looking at where the perceived risks are, but also where the biggest impacts could be. Where big companies are involved, the financial impact of failure will likely be more significant. Ultimately, there is no such thing as a “riskless” investment, he adds. During the global financial crisis, a cash investment was arguably riskier than a diversified equity portfolio. Some banks were at risk of going under, whilst equities recovered strongly over the following years, Lindhiem says. “You can mitigate quite a lot of risk in the investment process but you can never eliminate it totally and once you’ve done all of the work and employed all of the expertise… your last line of defence is possibly diversification.”