“Every once in a while, an up-or-down-leg goes on for a long time and/or to a great extreme and people start to say ‘this time it’s different’. They cite the changes in geopolitics, institutions, technology or behaviour that have rendered the ‘old rules’ obsolete. They make investment decisions that extrapolate the recent trend. And then it turns out that the old rules still apply and the cycle resumes. In the end, trees don’t grow to the sky, and few things go to zero. Rather, most phenomena turn out to be cyclical.” – Howard Marks, Oaktree Capital A standout contributor to returns has been Naspers South African investors have experienced solid investment returns over the past decade with the FTSE/JSE All Share Index (Alsi) returning almost 10% per annum versus inflation of 6% per annum.  The Industrials sector was the driver of these returns, delivering almost 17% per annum over the same period. The Financials and Resources sectors lagged Industrials, returning 13% and -1% per annum respectively over the same period. Many industrial shares on the Alsi contributed in notable ways to the stellar returns achieved by this sector but the standout contributor has been Naspers. Naspers’s weight in the index has gone up a staggering 14 times in the Alsi and 15 times in the SWIX over the last 10 years. Naspers index weighting Weighting at March 1 2008 Weighting at February 28 2018 Alsi 1.3% 18.8% SWIX 1.5% 22.5% Source: Bloomberg Naspers, which has its origins as a newspaper and magazine publisher and printer from the early 1900s, listed on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange in 1994. Since listing, the company has evolved into a multinational internet and media group – offering services in more than 130 countries and with operations now spanning video entertainment; gaming; internet communication and e-commerce. The game-changer for Naspers was its purchase of a stake in the Chinese media and internet company, Tencent. The investment in Tencent of $34 million in 2001 is now worth over $160 billion – in fact more than Naspers’ entire current market valuation. Past returns are not a predictor of future returns Naspers has been an outstanding investment for those who have held the share from almost any point since its listing until the present time. Much of this excess return can be attributed Naspers’s investment in Tencent, which itself has risen 43 times over the past ten years. The table below contrasts this incredible performance relative to other global technology stocks: Cumulative returns over last ten years Tencent 4 257% Amazon 2 246% Apple 897% Google 368% Source: Bloomberg Where to from here? There is, however, a conundrum facing South African investors. From this point, will Naspers continue to be as good an investment as it has been; or even as good an investment as the broader South African market? This question is becoming even more valid and poignant given that most South African investors have Naspers as one of their (if not the) largest investments in their portfolios. While many investors use Naspers’s index weighting as their reference point for the quantum of their exposure to the share, we believe the position size of a share in an actively-managed investment portfolio should not be guided simply by the share’s weight in an index, but by the absolute return and risk expectations intrinsic in the share and company itself. None so blind as those who will not see When a share has rerated to the lofty price-earnings multiple Naspers has over the past few years, the implied margin of tolerance for negative surprises; missteps; trapped value or uncertain outcomes starts to reduce considerably. The virtually unanimous positive write-up on the stock by the sell-side stockbroking community points to a situation where the consensus opinion is appearing oblivious to some quite pertinent drawbacks in the company. We believe there appears to be mounting reasons to indicate that the return and risk dynamics for investing in Naspers from this point are not so obviously skewed in an investor’s favour. Some concerns we believe are understated include: ‘Trees don’t grow to the sky’ One of the longest standing investment adages is “buy low and sell high”. Easy to grasp in theory, however, much more difficult to implement in practice. The difficulty comes in the counterintuitive forces which cause investors to want to hold their winners and sell their losers. In the case of Naspers, this has been a great story of investment success for investors. Both the company’s idiosyncratic features coupled with a highly positive investment environment for the technology sector have contributed to this success. But indeed “trees don’t grow to the sky”. Naspers has become a very tall tree. And sometimes it is hard to see the wood for the trees. Delphine Govender, co-founder of Perpetua Investment Managers.