At the start of 2016 the rand weakened to nearly R17 to the dollar and the yield on ten-year government bonds had reached nearly 10%. This was shortly after Nhlanhla Nene had been dismissed as the finance minister. The shock that Nene’s removal sent through the markets was profound. This is because whatever forces were trying to capture the South African state were no longer working in the shadows. They had felt bold enough to step out into the open. Clearly, the country was facing a crisis, and investors had every reason to be concerned. Their first worry was whether their wealth would be safe in South Africa, but secondly they had to think about their prospects for growth. Could they still receive worthwhile returns in an environment where the economy was stuttering and political uncertainty was so high? Many of them felt that prospects must be better elsewhere. Reasonable advice? They would not have struggled to find opinions supporting this view. There were a number of loud voices advocating that South Africans should take as much money out of the country as they could. A number of people advocated investing everything offshore. It might have sounded like reasonable advice, but the truth is that anyone who did this is probably around 20% poorer today in rand terms than they were then. This is because the currency has since strengthened significantly to under R13 to the dollar. Briefly, it was even under R12. Every dollar purchased at R16.50 can now only be sold for R12.80. That is a 22% decline. The same people who were encouraging investors to expatriate as much of their wealth as possible would also likely have been telling investors to stay very far away from South African government bonds. The risks, they would have said, are simply too high. However, local bond yields have come back significantly since the height of uncertainty in the local market. They are currently around 8.6%. The capital gains this represents means that for the three years to the end of April, South African government bonds have actually delivered better returns for South African investors than any other asset class. Source: 27Four Investment Managers Most local investors don’t, however, hold most of their portfolios in government bonds. Their investments are far more likely to be in multi-asset funds with exposure to a number of asset classes, of which bonds is just one. It’s indisputable that since the start of January 2016, these funds have not done particularly well. Average returns have been below inflation. However, the returns from offshore funds have been materially worse. In fact, they have been negative. Source: Morningstar Don’t bet on a single outcome It is therefore evident that any South African who took all of their wealth offshore in early 2016 did not make the best investment decision. While there’s no question that local returns have been pedestrian over this period, they have nevertheless been better than could have been achieved elsewhere. This clearly illustrates that investors need to think carefully about who they listen to. One should be extremely cautious about anyone who has strident opinions. This is because they tend to be on the extremes – expressing views that are predicated on a single outcome. These are things like saying that the rand must continue to weaken, Trump will never win the election, or Brexit will ruin the British economy. They forget that the world, and markets, are never certain and frequently produce the unexpected. The best, and smartest investors never believe that they can outwit the market. They don’t place bets that will only see gains if their specific view about a specific event is realised. Rather, they get the odds in their favour by managing risk intelligently. They never assume that they know for sure what is going to happen, because they know that they don’t. The market has a way of making fools of those who believe too much in their own convictions. Investors should bear that in mind.