Towards the end of 2015 it had become obvious that the Cambist platform, which had offered returns of 19.5%, had just about collapsed. A High Court judgement declaring a number of emolument attachment orders (EAOs) unlawful and invalid had effectively torpedoed the business model. Cambist relied on EAOs as it sold debt contracts on its platform backed by these orders, which ensured monthly repayments. Once these orders became unenforceable, however, payments dried up and those left holding the contracts had no way to recover what they had paid for them. Read: Triumph for the working man Even for months before this judgement, however, Cambist had been in trouble. Its future had been shaky ever since OneLaw, the debt collection company that originally owned the platform, went into liquidation. Although Cambist very quickly registered itself as a separate company and gave assurances that it would continue to operate, users were left without any effective way to sell their contracts or buy new ones. The online trading platform was suspended in December 2014 and never reinstated. Read: Cambist suspends platform Read: Cambist begins to crumble The company’s website address, cambist.co.za, has since fallen into disuse. Online records show that the domain name is now owned by someone in Indonesia. Moneyweb contacted the new owner who confirmed that he had purchased the domain name, but knew nothing about its history. “We register domain names around the world that our system identifies as potentially valuable and monetise the traffic to them with Google and/or sell them onward as opportunities arise,” he said. “When we registered this domain it was available so that anyone could have registered it.” Records available from the Companies and Intellectual Property Commission also show that Cambist, which was registered as a separate company in 2014, is in the process of being deregistered. The only listed director of the company is Corne Aldum, the founder of Bridge Finance, OneLaw and a number of related companies. Emails sent to the general Cambist email address and to the company’s last known manager, Lise Oerlemans, were returned as undeliverable. It therefore appears that Cambist has simply ceased to exist. Worthless guarantee While Cambist would never confirm just how much money was invested through its platform, Moneyweb is aware of individuals who each invested R1 million or more. At one point the company claimed to have 3 000 users. The frustration that investors have faced is that Cambist always guaranteed the returns it was offering. This guarantee has however turned out to be worthless. Read: Whatever happened to Cambist’s trust fund guarantee? Furthermore, no authorities appear to have taken any action to protect these investors or hold anyone accountable for their losses. A number of enquiries made by Moneyweb over the last month have all led to dead ends. The Financial Services Conduct Authority (FSCA – previously the Financial Services Board) referred Moneyweb to the South African Reserve Bank (Sarb). However, the Reserve Bank seemed to think that the FSCA was handling the matter. “With regard to Cambist, the final report concluded that the business model was not a contravention of the Banks Act, and as such the matter was closed and there was no further involvement from our side,” Sarb spokesperson Ziyanda Mtshali said. “In this regard, it must be noted that this does not necessarily mean that the scheme or product was legitimate – our investigation was confined to whether there was a contravention of the Banks Act. The matter was pursued by the FSB for other possible transgressions.” The National Credit Regulator did not respond to a number of requests for information about what enquiries it had undertaken or if it had made any conclusions about either Cambist’s offering or the contracts it was selling. It appears, therefore, that Cambist users have simply been left high and dry with no way to recover their money and no one able to enforce the guarantee that they were given. It is unfortunately a very a hard way to learn to steer clear of unregulated investment schemes.