PATRICK CAIRNS:  Naresh Tulsie, the new Fais Ombud taking over from Nolunto Bam, is on the line from Pretoria. Naresh, thanks for making time to chat to me. Congratulations on your new position. NARESH TULSIE:  Thank you very much and for the opportunity to speak with you regarding the way this office runs and for my appointment as the Fais Ombud. PATRICK CAIRNS:  First of all, why is it important to have an effective Ombud? NARESH TULSIE:  It originates from a situation of you being cognisant of the fact that you have consumers out there who are consumers of financial services. And, in making use of those financial services, they don’t always achieve the outcomes that they desire in purchasing or investing in those financial services. The question was how to deal with disputes when those sort of eventualities arise. In the distant past our law… was restricted to the litigation process, which we all understand is very adversarial-driven, it’s costly, it’s time-consuming and a lot of consumers were effectively excluded from that by virtue of lack of finances, and even a willingness for one to engage in an adversarial process like that. The Ombud’s office, in its various guises, provides an alternative where there is an alternative means of resolving disputes between financial consumers and the financial services providers for their complaints against [them], through informal, impartial means which try to deal with these in a very cost-effective manner, attention of account concepts such as fairness and equity, as well as legal positions. PATRICK CAIRNS:  You… educate the public about what it is that that your office actually does and how it works. NARESH TULSIE:  To be honest, even though we are part of… consumer education initiatives, which are currently being driven through the FCSA [Financial Sector Conduct Authority], previously known as the FSB [Financial Services Board] , I think a lot more can be done in that regard, especially bearing in mind the level of understanding of financial consumers we have in South Africa in particular, and the challenges they face with regard to access to communication facilities, access to SMS, access to websites, internet connectivity, etc. I am of the view… certainly a lot more… in that regard, and one of my key members would be to explore actively means to address that, and try and rectify it within the means of available… . PATRICK CAIRNS:  Your predecessor, Noluntu Bam, … other people feel a strong personal sense of…personal strength on the office. How are you going to continue her legacy? NARESH TULSIE:  I must start off by saying that I’m a huge proponent of the Ombud system. I’ve had some relationship with this office from the very first day it opened its doors, ready to guide us under the stewardship of the late Charles Pillay, and then Nolunto, both of whom I’ve known quite well over the years. Being a big proponent of the system I think is also just knowledge and thank them for the legacy that they’ve left behind, and the opportunity and the honour and privilege on my part both on what was put into place already. Though a few of the working methods and approach might be slightly different, the intention is not to radically alter but to fine-tune and make better the previous office functions in order to build on what we’ve achieved in the upbuild of … I’m very aware of certain criticisms levelled at this office and it’s being examined, it’s being acknowledged in terms of identifying where there is room for improvement in terms of both our procedures, personnel systems, people, and how we can improve on those in producing a better service to the financial consumer out there who is accessing our office for assistance as well as in terms of the stakeholder relationships that we hold with industry. Because if you can keep this on a professional basis, where we also promote the integrity of the financial industry while also promoting consumer protection, that ultimately is what this office is about. So a large part of what I will be doing in the immediate future is a thorough examination of what it is that we do, how we do things, if it works here at optimal level, and if not how can we improve on it, both in terms of the service that we deliver, the financial consumers approaching our offices, and in terms of the way we interact with industry, the way we interact with fellow regulators, the way we interact with fellow Ombudsmen offices, the way we work forward in terms of the evolutionary nature of the financial services industry, as well the evolving regulatory environment. PATRICK CAIRNS:  Well, you’ve been there a week. But are there any practical steps that you can give us an idea that you are already planning to implement? NARESH TULSIE:  One of the items…do very early on is the recruitment process and what sort of trend we are looking at, what sort of background they are coming from, what expertise they bring to the office, how they complement the skill set that the company has in the office, their knowledge of the financial services industry. So it’s an idea. I come with a very varied background where I practised as an attorney, I’ve worked for insurance companies, I’ve worked with financial intermediaries, I’ve worked for an Ombudsman’s office. Those give you very valuable insights in terms of how thing should operate on a day-to-day basis. That’s more along the lines of what we’d be looking for – not just… technical skill, but actual knowledge of the workings of the industry, because if we can get more of that in house, I think that would just make it easier in terms of where we process these complaints, our turnaround times and the quality of the responses that we provide, both to consumers and to the financial services industry. PATRICK CAIRNS:  The Ombud has in the past threatened a number of people  by declining to investigate certain matters. You mentioned at the start of this discussion that the Ombud provides an alternative to very costly and often adversarial legal action, but the Ombud has in fact declined a number of matters and said that they have to go to court. Is that a matter of the Ombud not having the capacity to investigate the complicated matters and, if so, how would you address that? NARESH TULSIE:  I’m very cognisant of that criticism, and I am aware of issues like that raised against this office in the past, and finding ways and means to address those sorts of things. I think my long-term intention above trying to fix things overnight, which I know will all be hopelessly set to fail, is to rather get a proper understanding of what those challenges are, why it is that we believe we have this lack of resources, is that lack of resources in fact due to individuals, due to skills, due to systems, due to processes, due to technology, or whatever else that might be, and try and find ways to deal with not just a quick fix, but on a long-term basis, with the ultimate aim being to try and deal with as many of these complaints as possible that are being sent to our offices and trying to assist the consumers in some form or way in terms of bringing about finality to their complaint. And while I readily acknowledge that in the past it might not have always been the case, I am very cognisant of the fact that some of that needs to be addressed, needs to be changed. And that means altering our system, altering our stakeholder relationships, it means getting closer with our regulators, getting closer with industry, or sprucing up our technology or even our in-house skills, then so be it. If it means doing those over an extended period of time with fixed goals and a way to get there, then that’s what I’m prepared to do and committed to look at so that we try and close as many of those gaps that have been identified in the past, and to give you an opportunity as well to examine in-house what those gaps are, where they are coming from, and how to go about addressing them in a manner that is both sustainable and that will add value to the way we function. PATRICK CAIRNS:  One of the other complaints that we received about the Ombud is that there is a limit of R800 000 when it comes to matters of what you can claim. I believe that’s been the case for quite some time. It hasn’t been raised. Is that a reasonable limit? If I invest all of my savings with somebody and I lose all of that money, it might be a few million rand, the Ombud says to me well, I can’t investigate that, it’s too much money and you need to go to court. My response would be I’ve lost all my money. NARESH TULSIE:  I think what we need to bear in mind is that this office is a creature of statute. Its mandate is created by an act of parliament, and that’s where the limitation sits. However, I need to do the…and in this regard, having conferred on a number of other Ombud schemes that are floating out there, both statutory and voluntary schemes which have been granted statutory recognition, it does seem at first glance that that quantum is out of kilter with what the rest of the Ombudsmen have to deal with in terms of their limitation on quantum, … dictionary term based on that quantum. So it is something that is being looked at. As a start point as well, I want to say that in terms of where we function right now we still have the opportunity to day-to-day responding party to a complaint and get them to agree in writing to a limitation being exceeded. But that is far from the ideal. It is something I need to look at and that we need to consider what the relevant stakeholders and which now Treasury and the regulators confirm. And I’m hopeful that with the regulators keen on examining the whole Ombud system within South Africa as a whole, that discussion will also get … in terms of how this office is mandated and the quantum of limitations in terms of our jurisdiction as well. PATRICK CAIRNS:  Do those twin peaks change in terms of the Ombud’s role and responsibilities? NARESH TULSIE:  Well, my personal view is that in itself twin peaks doesn’t make any such drastic change, bearing in mind that it is a primary piece of legislation sitting up two different pillars of regulation. On the conduct side by virtue of the financial sector conduct report, the … replaced…it has been from April 1, and then the institution of the prudential regulator. What would be more mutual and have a greater impact on both our financial services industry and on the way this office and various other Ombuds’ offices function are the conduct …regulations that will be passed. As a start point, through the RDR or Retail Distribution Review legislative changes that have been implemented since December 15 last year, and that are of an ongoing nature. What we are really looking forward to is the conduct of financial institutions bill, which we are expecting a draft of later this year hopefully, and which is expected to be implemented in the next 18 to 24 months, which will create the ground rules in terms of how financial services providers should conduct themselves, including standards where distribution and advice would with the intention of being… what the regulator is trying to achieve is a move away from a one-size-fits-all approach, like we currently have with various pieces of legislation, where it has created certain inexpediencies or inefficiencies, and it took some unnecessary costs, and an approach of moving away from ticking the box in terms of compliance and not really having in mind fair customer outcomes. So I think if anything goes, additional piece of legislation which will follow twin peaks of the Financial Services Regulation Act, will be enablers for us in that regard in order to examine where the fair customer outcomes have been met, and how to hold financial services providers accountable in meeting those fair customer outcomes. PATRICK CAIRNS:  Do you expect that to make the job easier or more difficult? NARESH TULSIE:  I’m hoping it will make it a lot easier because I think the industry will then have a greater understanding in terms of what it is they need to do in order to meet those fair customer outcomes rather than just ticking a box as opposed to what the country has right now. And I think it has greater clarity in that respect. There is also greater scope for holding industry accountable where they fall short in terms of meeting those outcomes.