Listed diversified financial services group Efficient has moved to dispel fears that its finances are in trouble after a trading update indicated that it would suffer a loss of between R272 million and R301 million in the financial year through August. This follows the cancellation of a five-year profit share agreement with Robert Walton, who has managed and developed Boutique Collective Investments (BCI) and Boutique Investment Partners (BIP) under the Efficient Invest banner since 2013. The transaction was accounted for as an expense in the group’s income statement. In terms of the agreement, Walton and some of the employees in the business unit earned 66% of the net profit before tax from this business unit. Heiko Weidhase, CEO of the Efficient Group, equates the economic impact of the transaction to the group acquiring the full earnings generated by BCI and BIP. Source: Efficient Group “The benefit to us is that the expense is tax deductible as an operating expense.” There were initial efforts to structure the transaction as an acquisition, but the corporate advisor indicated that it had to be accounted for in the income statement. At R480 million, the transaction dwarfs the group’s market capitalisation of roughly R350 million. This includes cancellation payments of R378.5 million, R19.7 million of restraint payments and R81.8 million of retention incentive payments. Weidhase acknowledges that it is a “big number”, but says since they already know the parties, business and clients well, they are “quite comfortable” with the transaction. “That typical risk of acquisition is not there, which I think is very important if you look at the size of the transaction relative to the group.” He says the group considered the cancellation of the agreement three years ago. In hindsight, they should have done it then. “This business has really proven stellar growth and as a group I would rather have 100% of that [and] make sure that the employees and our partners are properly tidy – which we’ve achieved.” Source: Efficient Group Since August 2013, the business has grown from R2 billion in assets under administration and no assets under management and consulting to R41 billion in assets under administration and R25 billion in assets under management and consulting. Efficient has borrowed R240 million from Standard Bank to finance the transaction and will be raising R158 million in equity from the market. A deferred payment of R82 million is payable to profit share participants on August 31, 2021. Walton and his team will continue to focus on growing the same businesses and will expand their focus to the wider group. Asked whether there was any resentment about the cancellation, Weidhase is philosophical, and says in transactions like these, all the parties must be “a little bit unhappy”. “I think we have got a fair deal and I think both parties on both sides feel that it is a fair transaction.” A professional company provided them with an independent valuation, and the transaction was benchmarked against industry standards locally and internationally. While Walton and his team will likely see their income drop substantially in terms of the new five-year profit share and bonus scheme agreement, Walton says this will depend on inflows from new and existing clients. Walton says if they meet their new targets they will do very well, but acknowledges that the past five years was an “exceptional” period. Yet they are receiving a significant amount of money following the cancellation of the previous agreement and are happy with the outcome. Keith McLachlan, fund manager at AlphaWealth, says Efficient would not have been in a position where they were earning one-third of the profit if they didn’t have the original profit sharing agreement with Walton in place. Moreover, they would not necessarily have been able to motivate or retain him to build a business like this if they hadn’t given him a large degree of upside in establishing the businesses. “The temptation is to penalise them for the situation. In fact, [in] my opinion, the opposite is true. It is actually a good problem to have to have a very profitable business that you have to buy back,” McLachlan says.