Government is targeting infrastructure investment to promote growth through its stimulus package, yet is silent on the high crime levels that are a major cause of divestment in a society with characteristics of both the Wild West and a Mafia state. Without getting crime down to tolerable levels, economic growth will remain at best stunted. South Africa’s shocking crime statistics have been paraded on social media and talkshows as being mainly caused by poverty. Economic growth can be considered essential if poverty is to be reduced, and crime levels would then also decline. Looking at data, however, an inverse picture emerges. The statistics on crimes against business indicate that a range of criminals is at work: those who shoplift a piece of frozen chicken, those who need a sheep for the month, and those who cash in on others in transit. It’s almost like the range from informal traders to struggling SMEs and the few big corporates. Crimes against business Bank robbery 1 per month Cash-in-transit heists 5 per week Truck hijacking 25 per week Robbery at business premises 56 per day Stock-theft 80 per day Shoplifting 173 per day Burglary at business premises 198 per day Source: SAPS Crime statistics 2017/2018 The belief that poverty causes crime, which subtly shifts the blame for criminality from the perpetrator to society, was at work again: almost no-one mentioned really poor countries with far lower crime rates. Tanzanians are significantly poorer with a per-capita GDP of less than 20% of South Africa’s, but on the Word Economic Forum (WEF) Global Competitiveness Index, Tanzania ranks significantly better (36 positions) than SA concerning the cost of crime. Sri Lanka, which, like South Africa, suffers from a violent past, is another example. Recently, Stellenbosch University economics professor Johan Fourie was the lone voice asking why criminality is higher in the richer provinces of Gauteng and the Western Cape than the poorer Limpopo. The argument even changed from poverty to the rich being the culprit: if they were not so rich and no wealth gap existed, there would be no incentive to pilfer … Anine Kriegler of the University of Cape Town, responding to the shockingly high crime statistics, argues that police minister Bheki Cele’s call for more police isn’t the answer since “a number of studies on the relationship between policing levels and crime rates suggested that the impact of more police is generally small”. Kriegler argues that leaders must address inequality: “South Africa is a highly unequal society (and) has one of the highest Gini-coefficients in the world. Research shows that inequality and crime go hand in hand.” She quotes a paper in the April 2002 edition of the Journal of Law and Economics Vol XLV by Pablo Fajnzylber and Daniel Lederman titled Inequality and Violent Crime. Unfortunately, she did not mention that the authors themselves thought their paper had serious shortcomings – “we have not provided a way to test or distinguish between various theories on the incidence of crime” and “a more nuanced econometric exercise than what we offer is required to shed light on the relative validity of various theories on the inequality-crime link.” Another shortcoming is that “we have not identified mechanisms through which more pronounced inequality leads to more crime. Uncertainty about these mechanisms raises a variety of questions with important policy implications. For instance, should police and justice protection be redirected to the poorest segments of society?” The source Kriegler quoted to argue against increased policing actually proposed the consideration of more policing in poorer areas. No definite correlation between inequality and crime in the data Unlike what Kriegler suggests, a recent World Bank funded study on the socio-economic determinants of crime in SA came to the conclusion: “We did not detect any relationship between inequality and violent crime, nor between unemployment and any crime type.” While several studies have found positive correlations between poverty and crime, in 2013 Hector Rufrancos of the University of Stirling in Scotland remarked that the “findings on income inequality and property crime differ considerably to those on income inequality and violent crime”. While a review of the literature suggests that “property crime is related very strongly to changing income inequality … [the] time-series evidence on the relationship between income inequality and violent crime is considerably more mixed”. Gini and the cost of crime for business The Enterprise Observatory of SA (EOSA) tested the correlation between the Gini coefficient and criminality at a global level. For the latter, we used the WEF’s indicator of the cost of crime for business (see chart below). No correlation between inequality and the cost of crime Sources: EOSA, WEF The two countries with the highest Gini coefficient (Lesotho at 0.632 and South Africa at 0.625) experience radical differences in the cost of crime. In addition, the hail gunshot distribution around the regression line in the chart confirms there is no correlation, contrary to the arguments by Kriegler. While correlations do not prove causality, the following chart is essential to understand criminality in South Africa. Inefficient policing closely correlated with crime against business Sources: EOSA, WEF The correlation between inefficient policing and a high cost of crime for business is so significant that one can confidently predict that when policing efficiency improves, crimes against business decrease. Likewise, an increase in crime against business can be taken as an indicator that there has been slippage in efficiency in the police service. In 2017, according to the WEF, South Africa’s police ranked as the 20th most inefficient, with the cost of crime for business as the fifth highest in the world – a clear signal that investment in South Africa is too risky. The only countries with a higher cost of crime for business are El Salvador, Venezuela, Honduras and Guatemala. Combining the WEF’s cost of crime for business data with the Fraser Institute’s Economic Freedom rankings, a significant correlation emerges – businesses in the most free economies have the lowest cost of crime. South Africa, however, is sliding towards the cliff-edge. Venezuela reached that point, then dropped into the abyss. Businesses in the ‘most free economies’ have the lowest cost of crime Sources: EOSA, WEF, Fraser Institute While acknowledging the complex characteristics of poverty and structural unemployment, without economic growth these systemic symptoms cannot be addressed. As British author C Northcote Parkinson remarked: “Aim at prosperity and employment will follow. Aim at employment and you will get anything but prosperity.” SA’s high crime prevents investment, growth The crime rate already prevents local investment and dissuades South Africans from embarking on business ventures: * Stats SA’s Victims of Crime 2015 report calculates the percentage of persons refraining from establishing a home business out of fear of crime at 11.8%. * P Cichello, L Mncube & M Oosthuizen (2011) found that crime was the primary deterrent preventing people from entry into the informal sector. * There are expanding areas of zero investment in South Africa with crime playing a significant role. In the Tokologo local municipal area, there were on average 2.6 crimes per business per year. The value of non-farm commercial and industrial properties has dropped to less than 1% of the overall municipal valuation role. * Considering that the majority of Tokologo’s urban residents aren’t paying property tax (despite many being beneficiaries of RDP houses), without investment, the municipality has no hope of coming close to balancing its books. Crime is effectively killing off numerous municipalities and thereby shooting massive holes in National Treasury’s money bags. A stimulus package that would really get the economy growing should entail: * Effective and efficient policing, with a different skills mix than at present and institutional accountability. The strategy should commence with a reformed police service where remuneration, bonuses and promotion is linked to independent assessments and the monitoring of performance in crime prevention, detective work success rates, and prosecution. It should be introduced wall-to-wall in a single province with newly defined job descriptions and individual performance targets. This decentralised monitoring mechanism should involve the provincial and local government, the private sector and civil society (such as Accountability Now and the Institute for Security Studies), with the police bound to report regularly in writing and with presentations. * Stop the rot in state-owned enterprises: cull the state-owned airlines and privatise the six main ports – Cape Town, Durban, Richards Bay, Port Elizabeth (two separate deals ) and East London – into competing entities. * Outsource primary and secondary education in mathematics, physics and chemistry to independent service providers that meet Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study criteria. There’s no way the department of basic education and Sadtu (the South African Democratic Teachers Union) can jack up their services in these subjects to the levels required by a growing economy. * Put civil service on a drastic weightloss programme, shrinking it by shedding all positions that cannot be linked to outcomes. Political leadership is required and the programme should begin by trimming the bloated overweight cabinet to 30-40% of its current size. More efficient policing is not sufficient to get crime levels down to tolerable levels: economic growth, efficient service delivery and the nurturing of a modern societal ethos and accountability have a role as well. However, the type of investment and economic growth we need cannot kick in at the current extraordinary high and debilitating cost of crime. Lower crime levels have to be ensured, and that requires accountable and efficient policing. If the current government cannot perform this Kindergarten task of governing, the exodus of productive knowledge will accelerate. * Johannes Wessels is director of the Enterprise Observatory of SA. This is a condensed version of two articles on the cost of crime for business that first appeared here.