South African investors in stocks that have a primary listing elsewhere, such as Richemont, British American Tobacco, and Anheuser-Busch, will know that claiming back the difference paid in dividend withholding taxes can be an administrative nightmare. Swiss-headquartered Companie de Financiere Richemont is particularly aware of the challenges involved and goes to some lengths to keep shareholders informed of the steps necessary to claim the tax back in their particular jurisdiction. In Switzerland, the dividend withholding tax is a hefty 35%, while in South Africa it is 20%, up from 15% previously. At the Richemont AGM in September, shareholders approved a total dividend payable of CHF 1.90 per share. After tax, the net dividend payable was CHF 1.2350 per share. However, in South Africa, Richemont trades on the JSE via depository receipts (DR) at a ratio of 10 DRs to each Richemont ‘A’ share. By extension, local investors will receive one-tenth of the stated dividend for each DR held, or CHF 0.190, before tax. The net dividend per DR held is CHF 0.1235. According to the withholding tax recovery programme, South African investors in Richemont are entitled to claim back the difference between the two tax regimes. This is calculated at CHF 0.038 per CFR DR. The amount recovered will be converted into rand and will be remitted to CFR DR holders who participate in the programme once the reimbursement of the tax has been received from the Swiss Federal Tax Authorities. A statement issued by Richemont on Tuesday evening alerts investors to the fact that the company will e-mail the withholding tax reclaim letters this week. This allows DR holders to reclaim 20% of the 35% Swiss withholding tax. However, because the dividend tax regime was changed from 15% to 20% in March 2017, investors are now only entitled to claim back 15% of the 35%. Sars will retain the 5% difference.  Investors are also alerted to the fact that due to currency fluctuations, the effective rate used to arrive at the rand refund payment to CFR DR holders could differ from that applicable to the dividend payment itself.