As much as it pulls at our heartstrings, the SABC’s sad attempts to invoke ‘Living the legacy’ as a slogan should not sway government from ruthlessly resetting its focus on more crucial projects. Nor should it placate angry taxpayers being faced with yet another example of government wasting taxpayers’ money. It is time to pack it in. Auditor-General’s (AG) Report to Parliament Yet, in the ‘Strategic Outcomes Generated Report’ on page 34, management stated that the group had achieved “effective risk management and sufficient internal control environment to ensure compliant governance practice” for the reason that there was an ongoing process to clear audit findings. This is an indication of management’s complete lack of appreciation of the seriousness of the situation. Implementing proper systems, curtailing irregular expenditure, safeguarding the fixed assets, and producing a believable set of financial statements, will require greater effort and commitment than merely “clearing audit findings”. Management is also of the view that the “SABC continues to operate as a going concern with the solvency ratio still favourable” (page 35). No, the available cash of R130 million will not cover trade and other payables of R1.1 billion, let alone contract liabilities and employee benefits of a further R285 million. Waiting in the wings are large non-current liabilities that will one day become due and payable, such as the employee benefits obligation of R1.2 billion. Comments on financial statements Government handouts The Department of Communications and National Treasury have committed an amount of R700 million to the company over five years, to facilitate its migration from analogue to digital technical infrastructure. However, the total amount of grant funding received to date from 2005 is R988 million! The government grant received in 2018 was R172.7 million (2017 – R181.7 million). It is likely that the broadcaster will be asking for much more. The way forward The SABC should urgently reduce operating costs, for example: Critical leadership positions were only filled after the year-end, hence, no one takes responsibility. As is to be expected, management has embarked on a turnaround strategy, which it is unlikely to manage on its own. We can therefore expect massive wastage on the cost of external management consultants who will be tasked with the strategy and implementation. We have heard this song before.