In the low return environment of the last few years, one of the biggest casualties has been local multi-asset low-equity funds. These unit trusts, which are designed to deliver steady, inflation-beating returns, have largely struggled to deliver. Due to the weak performance of the JSE, the returns boost that these funds generally get from their equity allocations (they can have up to 40% in stocks) hasn’t been there. As a result, very few have beaten a consumer price index (CPI) plus 3% benchmark over the last five years. This is generally accepted as the standard for this category. This has been tough for investors to accept, since the top bond funds and multi-asset income funds have outperformed most of this category for the past three years. In other words, investors could have taken less risk and received higher returns. A harsh judgement would be that multi-asset low-equity fund managers have let their clients down by persistently hoping for equity returns that have never materialised. Had they allocated more to fixed-income assets, their performance may have been better. However, the mandate of these funds would generally be to maintain that exposure to the stock market so that when better returns are available, they don’t miss them. Their job is not to try to time when that might happen. Nevertheless, investors have grown disillusioned. A recent analysis by the Association for Savings and Investment South Africa (Asisa) shows that there have been significant net outflows from most of the largest local multi-asset low-equity funds. Investors have preferred multi-asset income funds, where recent returns have been better. Read: Which SA unit trusts are attracting the most money? Whether this will be a long-term trend or a short-term anomaly depends very much on what happens to returns on the JSE. That is, ultimately, what fund managers in the multi-asset low-equity category depend on to be able to deliver performance meaningfully above inflation. As the table below indicates, only five funds out of the 109 in this category with three-year track records have produced returns of better than CPI plus 3%. Source: Morningstar It is notable that the Allan Gray Stable Fund, which is the largest fund in this category, tops the list. It is also the only one of the big multi-asset low-equity funds that saw positive net inflows over the last three years. The portfolio has also been at almost full weight in equities. It currently has a net equity exposure of 38.7%, with 25.5% of its funds held on the JSE. This is actually higher than its long term average. The Element Real Income Fund is carrying a very similar weighting to equities at 38.8%. Most of this is also local, which shows that it has still been possible for managers to find the kinds of returns investors expect on the JSE. It has not, however, been easy. The Sanlam Select Defensive Balanced Fund has, rather, turned more to the bond market for its returns. Nearly half of the portfolio is currently invested in local bonds. Its equity exposure is just 25.1%. The NFB Ci Stable Fund is also underweight equities at just 21% of its portfolio. A little under half of that is outside of South Africa. It has 34% of its funds in cash. This does indicate that managers are following slightly different strategies. Nevertheless, they do still have meaningful exposure to the stock market. Looking over the slightly longer term, the table below shows the performance of multi-asset low-equity funds over the last five years: Source: Morningstar Once again, the Allan Gray Stable Fund tops the list. It is, in fact, the only fund in this category to beat the CPI plus 3% benchmark over both three and five years. Allan Gray’s second fund in this category, the Optimal Fund, is also in the top three. This is, however, a completely different fund to the Stable Fund. It is not a traditional asset allocation fund, in that it only carries exposure to equities and cash. However, it hedges that equity exposure so that its return is actually uncorrelated to the stock market. This has been a particularly successful strategy over the last few years when the equity market has not delivered much upward momentum.