In tough times, human resource conversations move surreptitiously towards employees in tandem with company profitability. The health of the business determines if they keep or lose them, contributing to a stressful employment environment. South Africa is going through a difficult time Fears of recessions in the market and business cycles are foreshadowed by a period of balance sheet recessions, where companies are paying down debt instead of investing. This could trigger a self-fulfilling prophecy where companies’ reticence to spend drives poor economic growth and unemployment, at a time when government spend cannot offset a drop in private sector spend. A potential collapse in property and stock prices – exacerbating the risk of negative equity – adds fuel to these conversations around cost-cutting to protect shareholder value. Economic hardship also has psychosocial consequences. Some businesses are well positioned to leverage off a poor economy, but the cost of unemployment is broadly negative in aggregate. Industries react differently to the fallout of unemployment, but it is broadly negative Source: Author The impact on the unemployed – or underemployed – in the South African context is dire, as many employees support extended families with no additional income sources, adding significantly to the psychological stresses experienced by all. This explains why the catchphrase ‘economic freedom’ has been a powerful expression utilised in populist political rhetoric. In this climate, the balance of power shifts away from the employee towards the employer. But what options do employers have? In 1930s Australia, Sidney Myer of Myers Retail – a wealthy capitalist – believed in economic recovery and prosperity, not fundamental social change. He was respected by the community, including the socialist left. At the height of the depression, he cut the pay of employees (including himself) by 20% for 18 months, rather than lose a single job. He fought the depression-induced declining Australian purchasing-power with a profit margin of 5%, while dividends fell by 6%; provided funding for employment relief in the community leading to work for 1 000 people; and spent on upgrades to his stores, creating employment and boosting confidence. Thus, an employer took responsibility for a community in dire economic need. He believed in fair wages, and increased the wages of employees joining from other businesses. In addition to perks (like hospitals inside the store), he offered ‘staff partnership’ shares, building a ‘community’ within his empire. A hard man to work for, he received loyalty and higher productivity from his employees. He did not just tick the box of corporate social responsibility; he embodied it. Myer Retail listed on the Melbourne Stock Exchange in 1925. Analysing it to ascertain the management franchise and environmental, social and governance (ESG) premiums in the valuations then – versus today – would be an interesting exercise. It is a striking thought that these qualitative premiums could have offset the quantitative discounts that a low profit margin and a fall in dividend would have suggested. “It is the responsibility of capital to provide work,” said Myer. “If it fails in this, it fails to justify itself.” South African jobless recovery: a productivity conundrum Common investment buzzwords like corporate ethics, corporate social responsibility and impact investing are important to shareholders, as they are linked to profitability. However, while concerned about the high unemployment rate, shareholders criticise businesses that cannot cut costs enough to sustain share prices, pushing management to make imprudent decisions as they strive to reach target metrics through financial engineering. Studies show that worker effort and productivity increase during economic recessions. If management maintains this higher level in good times by building employee loyalty in tough times it can generate profitability consistently over prolonged periods. The rate of unemployment compared to capacity utilisation – jobless recovery? Source: Bloomberg, Stats SA Productivity measures quantity, while efficiency measures quality. Ideally both need to be at optimum levels. Companies need to respect employees as their most important assets, since see them as costs can negatively skew behaviour, generating a culture of insecurity and vulnerability, and affecting employee output. This can result in a ‘psychological recession’, potentially leading to long-term unemployment which is bad for the economy (as per the table above). In an interesting conversation along these thoughts, a manager in a South African insurance company mentioned having read that three things destroy a company: arrogance, bureaucracy and complacency – the ABCs. Corporate culture sickens in tough times, affecting worker output. If wages increase faster than productivity, either costs increase as inflation is passed onto consumers, or profitability declines, if absorbed into margins, reflecting in valuations. The Myer example is a fascinating study: increasing wages and a low business margin, coupled with an increase in productivity bought with loyalty. Management should gauge the climate and prevent breaches in the psychological contract from occurring. The psychological contract – built on trust The psychological contract is defined as a set of unwritten agreements of mutual obligations and perceptions between employers and employees. Formal employment contracts generalise mutual duties and responsibilities, while psychological contracts define in detail the work expected and the rewards to be received in a social-exchange relationship based on trust. A breach of trust can result in a breach of contract, by failing to deliver what was ‘promised’. The resultant loss of talent is costly, including the opportunity costs of losing skills invested in and having to re-employ these skills. There are various reasons why employees choose companies. Post the 2008 financial crisis, employees are asking questions regarding the longevity and culture of businesses. Where skills are in short supply, business integrity is a critical factor in attracting and retaining talent. Employers must utilise this to fulfil employees’ expectations, thus retaining staff, driving productivity and attracting talent. South Africa, quo vadis? In an economy facing uncertainty and contemporary risks – like globalisation, technological revolutions and long-lived employees – shareholders and investors must drive a consistent message to corporate South Africa regarding unemployment; a message that is sustainable and long-term focused for all stakeholders, even if it comes at the expense of unsustainable short-term gains. “To the employing class: find work for your less fortunate brethren, even if it hurts your Treasury. Do not wait till times get better; do not wait till the work will absolutely be of profit to you, do it now; now is the time to loosen up; to spend some of your savings on improving your business, your factory, your home, your garden, your car. If only half the great businesses and financial houses of this country would do what I am doing, the depression would be over in a week.” – Sidney Myer in December 1930, quoted in A Tradition of Giving: Seventy-five Years of Myer Family Philanthropy by Michael Liffman (Melbourne University Publishing, 2003) Rahima Cassim is an investment professional.