The worst month in nearly a decade for technology stocks has investors paying extra attention to Amazon.com’s third-quarter earnings report on Thursday. Amazon is the second-best performing megacap tech stock this year, with a 42% gain that trails only Netflix. While the web retailing giant is expected to say that revenue grew 30% from the year-earlier period, Wall Street is more focused on the profitability of key businesses including cloud computing, advertising and third-party retailing. “The highest-margin businesses are simply growing so fast that Amazon is either not able or not willing to reinvest enough to offset the margin expansion,” Macquarie analyst Benjamin Schachter wrote in a research note. After outperforming for most of the year, technology stocks have been hammered amid a resurgence of market volatility in October. A basket that tracks shares of Facebook Inc., Amazon, Netflix and Google parent Alphabet, has tumbled 15% in October, the worst month since at least 2012. Alphabet also reports earnings on Thursday after the markets close. Wall Street is projecting Amazon Web Services revenue of about $6.7 billion in the third quarter, based on the average of four analyst estimates compiled by Bloomberg. That’s up 45% from the same period a year ago. Strength in web services and advertising essentially puts Amazon “in a unique position to be as profitable as it chooses,” Wedbush analyst Michael Pachter wrote in a research note. He said Amazon’s operating income, which excludes depreciation and amortization, could exceed analyst estimates and come in at the high end of the company’s forecast of $1.4 billion to $2.4 billion. Analysts surveyed by Bloomberg expect $2.13 billion, on average. Amazon briefly exceeded a market valuation of $1 trillion last month but has since fallen more than 18%. Goldman Sachs sees “meaningful potential” for the shares to continue to outperform as the company generates returns on cash invested at a rate that exceeds peers and other sectors, analyst Heath Terry wrote.