South Africans initially took money offshore in large part because of political uncertainty and concerns over the future of the economy and the rand, and in many cases with less concern about the investment vehicle or the return. But over the last few years, there has been a change in the approach of South African investors to international investments, and offshore investment has become far more nuanced. “The investment rationale for diversification is now far more than a contingency plan,” says Andrew Brotchie, MD of Glacier International. “It is a strategic part of asset allocation and of how investors structure their affairs.” This is driven by an increased awareness that the South African investment universe and opportunities are relatively small, at less than 1% of global market cap, and that investors have a vast portion of their assets – from their fixed property to their pension – exposed to one country, and that exposure to other geographic areas is prudent. There was also, previously, a feeling that investors on the JSE were getting sufficient offshore exposure as South African companies increased their exposure offshore. But this has also changed, as investors realised they were not getting sufficient exposure to certain sectors, like the growing technology sector and the increasing prominence of companies like Facebook, Apple and Google. Another concern is the dominance of Naspers on the JSE, skewing local investment outcomes towards one share. “The diversification approach has become more ingrained in investment decisions,” Brotchie says. For investors wanting to diversify, the options are numerous and in some cases daunting. “There is a large range of investment choices, from share portfolios to cash, with many, varied options in between.” Investors need, firstly, to look at options. “From simply opening a bank account to offshore wrappers, there are many options and we have seen clients use them all,” Brotchie says. “Ten to 15 years ago there was a preference for offshore trusts or just putting money into an offshore bank account. “But offshore investment has evolved over the last few years and we are seeing two primary offshore vehicles of choice – a Lisp (linked investment service provider, or platform for unit trust investment in various companies) or offshore life wrapper. Offshore wrappers issued by South African life companies hold offshore assets on behalf of the investor, and there are several benefits, including the ability to nominate beneficiaries, no foreign inheritance tax and no tax administration on the part of the investor. “Offshore endowment wrappers have become the popular choice and there are a lot of advantages that investors would previously have enjoyed from a trust structure, like the ability to nominate beneficiaries, but at a relatively less expensive rate. “What people look for in these wrappers is the financial planning advantages that they provide,” Brotchie says, as investing in a wrapper takes care of many financial planning issues. Financial planning benefits have come to the fore and people are looking for a structure for the long term that includes tax and estate planning, which wrappers do efficiently, he says. The wrapper is the structure around the investments, but within those wrappers, investors have significant choice. Navigate by Glacier International has a range of funds, unit trusts and share portfolios backed by local fund managers and international partners including BlackRock and Schroders. “With Navigate, we give investors a range of funds with reputable managers and we tried to make it as intuitive as possible – offering cautious, moderate and aggressive options that we are comfortable with.” Glacier Research selects the range of funds and Glacier runs portfolios based on those that will meet clients’ objectives. These vary according to individual investor needs, from investors relatively new to international investment who need help identifying funds to more sophisticated investors interested in multiple funds in multiple geographies with a preference for being involved in crafting their own portfolio. Navigate offers investment choices via the Global Life Plan. Its portfolios are categorised according to the mix of assets they invest in and their risk exposure, making it easy for investors to understand, with investment in companies that have strong histories and performance records. It requires an initial five-year investment, after which it becomes open-ended, with a minimum R25 000 initial lump sum. Investors can easily change their underlying investments. “International investing used to be seen as something very different to what you did in South Africa. People wanted it separate, but now they want one holistic view of their investment portfolio,” Brotchie says. “There is now a different conversation about offshore investing,” he adds. Wrappers are providing some of the solutions to a more nuanced investment opportunity. Brought to you by Glacier by Sanlam. The Global Life Plan is issued by Sanlam Life Bermuda Branch. The Navigate fund range is provided under the Glacier Financial Solutions Category II FSP licence.