Here’s what caught our attention on Friday: 1. Investment Summit kicks off With $35 billion of investment pledges in the bag, President Cyril Ramaphosa is continuing his drive to get the additional $65 billion he is aiming for in investments into South Africa’s economy. Ramaphosa’s Investment Summit kicks off on Friday in Sandton, where CEOs, regulators and cabinet ministers are being hosted. Ramaphosa is hoping to unlock potential in sectors such as manufacturing, agriculture and energy and to find ways to haul the economy out of recession. The summit concludes on Saturday. 2. Richemont and Alibaba partner Richemont, the Swiss luxury goods group, and e-commerce company Alibaba have partnered in a joint venture (JV) to ‘provide luxury brand access to the Chinese markets’, the companies said in a joint statement on Friday. According to the statement, Alibaba will provide technology infrastructure, marketing, payments, logistics and other technology to the JV. 3. Glencore production report For the third quarter of 2018, Glencore delivered a 12% increase in its own-sourced copper production to 1.063 million tons. Own-sourced zinc production was 5% down to 786 000 tons while own-sourced nickel production was 13% higher to 90 900 tons. The figures are being compared to the 2017 production values. Coal production also increased by 6% to 96.7 million tons during the period. 4. Taxpayer legal hacks The investigation by the Tax Ombud into the delay of tax refunds from the tax authority has found that there was an intentional delay in the refund of tax monies. A total of R11 billion, which is in addition to the R20 billion in Vat refunds to be paid to taxpayers, will be paid out to clear the backlog. Moneyweb is reporting that taxpayers, who have been battling with the issue, can directly approach the Tax Ombud to act on their behalf against the tax authority. Read: Good news for taxpayers battling refunds, disputes 5. Rand update The rand is firmer on Friday as the US dollar rally pauses. The local currency was at R14.59 to the greenback at 8:50 am. Read: Rand firms as dollar rally pauses, stocks down