When president Cyril Ramaphosa announced his economic stimulus and recovery plan recently he said that “public finances have been constrained, limiting the ability of government to expand its investment in economic and social development”. It is thus no surprise that one of the main parts of the stimulus and recovery plan was the establishment of a South African Infrastructure Fund, fittingly prioritising infrastructure spending as a critical driver of economic activity. Given government’s “limited fiscal space to increase spending or borrowing” it is critical that the R400 billion contribution from the fiscus to the fund be geared to the maximum. An example of how to achieve this is the Renewable Energy Independent Power Producer Programme (‘REIPPP’). Since 2011, a total of 6 328 megawatts of wind, solar photovoltaic and other renewable energy generation capacity have been procured through this programme, amounting to nearly R200 billion in investment. How much of this has been invested by government? The answer is basically R0. Yes, apart from the cost of setting up and managing the programme, government’s direct investment into the individual projects is R0. It should be noted that government does have an indirect investment though – it is guaranteeing the off-take obligations of Eskom. If South Africa continues to consume electricity, the potential financial exposure of government under these guarantees is virtually R0. This is a very good example of the type of gearing government can achieve through a well-structured infrastructure investment programme. In our opinion the key aspect of the programme that should be duplicated in other infrastructure spheres is that it strictly adheres to the principles of and requirements for limited recourse project finance (‘Project Finance’). Through Project Finance, government can achieve the significant gearing of its own funds through private (and other) funding. Project Finance by nature will also require and instil the discipline in the design and implementation as well as operations and maintenance of the infrastructure that will ensure sustainability and affordability of the service(s) rendered through the infrastructure. For far too long, government has ignored the multiple benefits of Project Finance. Why so? One reason is the incorrect but enduring view that Project Finance amounts to privatisation. I hope that the REIPPP will help eradicate this misconception. We believe there are opportunities to duplicate the REIPPP in certain infrastructure spheres, which are under control and jurisdiction of national and/or provincial government. But a significant portion of the critical infrastructure in this country, such as water and sewage, is developed, operated and maintained by municipalities. This is the infrastructure that can impact most on economic growth, job creation and the general well being of the population. However, even more so than central government, most municipalities do not have any “fiscal space to increase spending or borrowing”. It is at municipal level where the need to fundamentally transform our approach to the rollout, building and implementation of infrastructure projects is the greatest and most urgent. It is at municipal level that Project Finance is the solution that can enable increased infrastructure to spend and yield the most significant benefits. Unfortunately, however, it is often at municipal level that the political will is more attuned to the benefit of the politicians and the party than the benefit of the masses. It is against this background that a perceived ‘loss of control’ through Project Finance poses a significant threat rather than a welcome solution. This is the key challenge for the South African Infrastructure Fund envisaged by the President. If it is going to be “business as usual” at municipal level, then in our opinion very little gearing of government funds will be achieved through the fund. Like rearranging the deck chairs on the Titanic, this will simply be an exercise of redirecting and reprioritising existing government funds. No, at municipal level, it must be “business unusual” and the key lies with significant gearing of government funds that can only be achieved through Project Finance. A concerted effort will be required by the President and his team to bring the municipalities on board. The success of his plan depends on it. Tiaan Claasens is CEO of Tiaan Claasens Consulting, and Ian Groenewald, CEO TBI.