Remember the halcyon days some eight months ago when a wave of ‘Ramaphoria’ swept the country? The rand surged to a three‐year high against the dollar. Borrowing costs fell as inflows into the country’s bonds and stocks surged. Our then new president was wooing citizens with his jogging skills. All was good. And then it crashed. The petrol price has gone up. The latest data from Statistics South Africa shows that unemployment has risen. And now, to top it all off, we’ve entered a recession. It’s all quite plainly very depressing news for consumers. While it’s not entirely hopeless – President Ramaphosa’s administration is continuing to push the message that they’re working hard to bring in investors (and next month there’ll be an investors’ conference) – consumers are very aware that they need to take steps to shield themselves from further economic strain. Johann Els from Old Mutual Macro Solutions says the recession means that 2018 growth will be even weaker than last year at 1.3%, when all the while we were expecting stronger growth. His prediction is that even if there’s a recovery in the third and fourth quarters, growth will be around 0.7% or 0.8%. This means that, while there is a light at the end of the tunnel for consumers, the tunnel is still quite a distance away. In the meantime, middle‐class South Africans need to immediately sit down and review their personal financial situation. It might not be a pretty picture, but you risk painting an even worse scene if you don’t fully understand what your finances look like. Budget It’s probably best to revise your budget in line with the rising cost of living. If once‐a‐week restaurant dinners are your thing, it’s probably best to cut that down to once a month. Better yet, do that special candlelit dinner at home. Need some good news? Well, many middle‐income earners will probably find that they are unnecessarily spending in certain areas and that there’s room to cut back and save. Even if it’s only a few hundred rand in savings, it’ll be extremely helpful in the long‐run. In fact, make sure you are putting some money away each month. Not only will this help in the long run, but if you put it into a savings account, you get even more bang for your buck with interest rates. Cut the credit It’s also important to look at how we spend on certain items. If you’re dipping into your credit card to buy a new fridge, remember that later on you’ll have to pay that back – with interest. Back in July, 58% of South Africans were struggling to pay off their credit cards and this recession likely won’t help. Whether you’re one of those or not, you would do well to stay away from that credit card. If you need to make a big purchase, either save over time or consider a spending route that’s not interest‐accruing. Do some homework on the options available to you for purchasing necessary products that don’t include dipping into further credit debt, like rent‐to‐own or finding second‐hand bargains. Let’s face it, we’re in for a rough few months, maybe even year or two. So buckle up … but not in a car that gets you into immense debt. Jonathan Hurvitz is CFO at Teljoy.