South African equities have not been the greatest place to be over the past 10 years. To the end of September, the FTSE/JSE All Share Index had delivered an annualised total return of around 11.5% for the past decade, which is well below its long-term average of close to 14.0%. That is, however, the return you would have seen if you were invested in an index-tracker. If you had picked a top-performing active manager, you could have done a lot better. In fact, as the table shows, the three top performers all delivered performance more in line with what investors would expect from equities: Source: Morningstar That is positive for investors. It shows that active management has been able to deliver the ‘alpha’ that everyone is after – a return above what is available just from the market itself. To be more accurate, however, it is really only great news for a very small number of investors. Statistics from the Association for Savings and Investment South Africa (Asisa) reveal that these three funds were all minor players 10 years ago. At the end of September 2008, their combined assets under management (AUM) came to R775.0 million: Source: Asisa Note: The PSG Equity Fund was previously known as the PSG Alphen Growth Fund. This is out of a total pool of assets in domestic equity funds that was R139.9 billion at this point. Taken together, that means that these funds represented 0.55% of assets under management in this category 10 years ago. In other words, even if everyone who was invested in these three funds back then had stayed invested for this entire period (which we can be reasonably confident they did not), barely half a percent of the money in South African equity funds experienced top performance over the past decade. Of course, as these funds have done well, they have attracted more assets. Their combined AUM at the end of June this year was R9.39 billion. That is still, however, just 2.3% of the total amount of money invested in South African equity funds. Lack of persistence If financial advisers and investors themselves were any good at picking top-performing funds, one would reasonably expect these numbers to be much higher. The fact that the vast majority of money was not, and still is not, in these funds is fairly compelling evidence that they were not identified as the past decade’s winners before the fact. What should be even more unsettling for investors is that if you put your money into them now, there’s no guarantee that you will be rewarded in future. Analysis by S&P Dow Jones Indices (SPDJI) in the US shows that it is very difficult for active managers to maintain top performance. The most recent SPDJI Persistence Scorecard found that of the 557 US equity funds that were in the top quartile of performers as of March 2016, only 2.33% were still in the top quartile by March 2018. The trend in this number looking over the 15 years for which it has been measured, is also downward. Admittedly, the Persistence Scorecard measures one-year performance, which is very short term and some would argue largely meaningless for equity funds. However, it does show how difficult it is for any active manager to deliver consistent outperformance year after year. Focus on the right things Further complicating matters is that South African investors now have far more funds than ever before to choose from. In 2008 there were 202 domestic equity funds. Today, there are over 300. Many of these are small, new funds, and there’s very little on which to base a judgement about how they might perform in the future. Bear in mind that at the end of September 2008 the Aylett Equity Fund was a tiny fund that was barely two years old. Anybody who invested at that point was doing so based on a very limited track record. Could anyone be completely confident back then that it was going to outperform over the next 10 years? Reasonably, the answer must be no. The lesson for investors is that you, and your financial advisor, should stop trying to pick future top-performers. It is a futile exercise. It is, in any case, the wrong thing to be trying to do. Instead of worrying about how funds perform relative to each other, it’s far more important to be certain that what your fund manager is doing makes sense to you as an investor. Do you understand their philosophy? Does their stock selection make sense? Do you appreciate under what conditions they might outperform or underperform? Do they give you confidence that, over time, they will help you reach your investment goals? Ultimately, those are the questions that really matter. Top performers will come and go, and trying to chase them will always result in you selling low and buying high, and destroying wealth. If, however, you find a fund manager whose views align with yours and with whom you are willing to go on a long-term journey, your outcomes will inevitably be better.