Here’s what caught our attention on Wednesday: 1. It’s Mboweni’s day In today’s episode of South Africa, finance minister Tito Mboweni will be delivering his maiden medium-term budget policy statement (MTBPS). The key issues expected to be addressed during the presentation include South Africa’s low economic growth, tax buoyancy and employment tax incentives, government debt, the state of SOEs. Social issues relating to land, education and the healthcare sector may also feature. The rand seems confident in Mboweni’s MTBPS. At 8:34 it was trading at R14.25 to the dollar. Listen: Five areas of concern to watch in the MTBPS, Mboweni has to contain costs, meet revenue targets Wish your minister luck! On Wednesday, October 24, 2018, MTBPS day, I will acknowledge ALL those who gave Tips For Tito on Twitter. Great contributions! Thank you! God bless you. God bless South Africa! God bless Africa! — Tito Mboweni (@tito_mboweni) October 23, 2018  2. Consumer price index South Africa’s headline consumer inflation was flat at 4.9% year-on-year in September. In August the headline CPI dropped by 0.2 percentage points to 4.9% from a 10-month high of 5.1% in July. On a month-on-month basis, inflation quickened to 0.5% in September after contracting by 0.1% in August. 3. Long4Life results Investment management company Long4Life delivered R145.7 million in headline earnings for the six months ended August 31, 2018, while headline earnings per share rose to 16 cents from 10.6 cents in 2017. The company reported revenue of R1.53 billion and a trading profit of R177.6 million for the period. No dividend has been declared. Read: Long4Life posts first-half profit, but no dividend 4. Gartner implicated in Sars inquiry The Nugent Commission of Inquiry into tax administration and governance at Sars is still going strong in its investigations. On Tuesday it emerged that US information technology firm, Gartner secured a contract with Sars worth almost R200 million without properly following procurement procedures. The company is alleging that it relied on Sars to ensure that procurement procedures were followed. Read: Did Gartner do a double Irish on Sars 5. Tourism is not booming South Africa’s tourism sector is struggling to overcome hurdles placed in its way by government. Despite directly supporting 726 500 jobs in 2017 and contributing R412.5 billion or 8.9% to GDP industry stakeholders feel they are not taken seriously and that they should have direct access to the president to discuss the impact of new policies in order for the sector to thrive. Read: ‘Government is failing tourism’