Supportive words from China’s securities regulator failed to slow the $3 trillion rout in the the nation’s stock market, as evidence of weakening domestic demand added to concern about the trade war with the US.  The Shanghai Composite Index retreated 1.4% as of 2:42 p.m. local time to head for its lowest close since November 2014. A gauge of consumer-related shares dropped the most after data showed purchases of passenger vehicles and online appliance sales slumped in September. Liu Shiyu, chairman of the China Securities Regulatory Commission, said the country will deepen capital market reforms and press ahead with opening up after he met with investors. The country’s benchmark stock gauge has slumped 19% in the past six months as trade tensions increased and data signaled a slowdown in the economy, while the yuan has fallen more than 9%. “The fundamental issues that haunt investors — lower global risk appetite and slowing Chinese economy — remain,” said Ken Chen, Shanghai-based analyst with KGI Securities Co. “The market will only recover unless those concerns are resolved, and it’s going to take more than just verbal promises.” The Hang Seng Index fell 1.3% on Monday after three weeks of losses, while the Hang Seng China Enterprises Index dropped 1.6%. Tencent Holdings slumped 2.6%. US Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin expressed concerns over the yuan’s weakness and called for a currency clause that would prevent competitive devaluations to be included in any trade talks with Japan. Separately, China’s ambassador to the US said Beijing has no choice but to respond to what he described as a trade war started by the US As the rout worsened, reports emerged of government support to aid investor confidence: The government is encouraging insurers to invest in listed companies and help cut liquidity risks connected with the pledging of firms’ shares to secure loans, the China Securities Journal reported on Saturday, citing a senior official with the banking and insurance regulator. The local government of Shenzhen has allocated tens of billions of yuan for efforts to reduce share-pledge risks and improve the liquidity of listed companies registered in the city, according to the Shanghai Securities News. More than 20 companies will be getting support in the first wave of measures, the report says. © 2018 Bloomberg L.P