The World Trade Organisation (WTO), the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank have called for greater trade integration in a bid to revive the multilateral trading system and enable countries to keep pace with the volatile global economy. In a joint report titled Reinvigorating Trade and Inclusive Growth published this week, the trio stress the role of liberalising the global service sector, emphasising that barriers to the trading of services are about as high as those of goods about a half century ago. As the services sector encompasses two-thirds of global GDP and employment, they make a case for the opening of service sectors to foreign competition. “It is also important that countries open up to international competition in services provided in other ways,” says the report, “including through foreign direct investment and the operation of foreign affiliates, and the temporary movement of workers across borders for the purpose of supplying services.” This report comes at a time when US President Donald Trump’s administration has taken a strong stand on H-1B visas (which allow companies to employ foreign workers in specialty occupations), a move that impedes the movement of highly skilled individuals from many emerging and frontier markets. “The opening of trade after World War II through the early 2000s lifted living standards and reduced poverty, but remains incomplete.” Innovation reinforces the need As innovation further shapes the types of services that can be traded across borders it is becoming even more important to address obstacles to any trade. World Bank projections in 2017 showed that trade liberalisation could raise manufacturing productivity by an average of 22% across a sample of 57 countries, with larger benefits for countries with stronger institutional environments. However, the slowdown in the pace of trade reform continues to create trade distortions, putting the risk on the strength and sturdiness of the global economic recovery. WTO deputy chief economist Alexander Keck explains: “It is very, very clear that here at the WTO we’re still sort of living off  the services commitment that [was] made in the Uruguay round. And that the gap between those commitments and the actual service’s policies applied is enormous.” The lack of structural reform is evident as foreign investments and foreign companies continue to face discrimination and restrictions. The report highlights that despite international commerce sales of foreign direct investment affiliates spiralling to $38 trillion in 2016, explicit restrictions – including foreign equity limitations, joint venture requirements and constraints on foreigners serving in senior management – still hinder the operations of foreign enterprises. Time to reinvest in open trade “It is time to reinvest in open, rules-based global trade. Since World War II a system of global trade rules has brought more openness, stability, and transparency to trade, nurturing unprecedented world economic growth,” states the report. The WTO, which is a global proponent for trade, stresses the key role of market access and a need to reduce tariff and non-tariff barriers, saying: “Tariff reductions could usefully target higher tariff rates more, bringing down averages and variation, which are especially high in agriculture; addressing tariff escalation; and closing gaps between bound and applied rates.” WTO director General Roberto Azevêdo points out that trade has been vital in lifting living standards and reducing poverty over the years, but says much more remains to be done. “Many WTO members recognise that improvements are necessary for many areas of trade policy to keep up with the evolving needs of their economies and their people.”