The 12 months to the end of June this year was a tough period for the local stock market. After the rally on the JSE in the second half of last year, a lot of those gains were given up in 2018. Overall, the market was up for this one-year window, but how you measure its performance can make a big difference to how strong that improvement looks. The S&P South Africa Domestic Shareholder Weighted (DSW) Index gained 12.89%. However, the S&P South Africa DSW Capped Index, which caps the weighting of stocks at 10%, was up just 7.61%. That is a material disparity, and shows the influence that a few large stocks had on index returns. Primary among these counters is Naspers, which is over 22% of the S&P South Africa DSW Index. Its share price gained around 37% in these 12 months. This difference also raises questions about how investors should measure the performance of local equity funds. Should managers be benchmarked against the broad market index, or against the capped version? The main argument in favour of the former would be that the market is what it is, and whatever it looks like is what funds should be measured against. However, the counter-argument is that no general equity fund manager could invest as much as 22% in Naspers, because regulations don’t allow them to concentrate more than 20% of their portfolio in a single stock. On top of which, doing so would be a high-risk strategy. They should therefore be measured against an index that they could, theoretically, replicate. They can then make decisions that would result in them being underweight or overweight stocks in that index, and thereby differentiate their performance. That is more of a like-for-like comparison. Relative performance This is an interesting debate because it obviously has a substantial impact on how the relative performance of local equity managers stacks up. Measuring how well they have performed as a group depends a great deal on which benchmark you use. This is clearly illustrated in the latest S&P Indices Versus Active (SPIVA) South Africa Scorecard, published this week. As the table below shows, just under half of active managers outperformed the S&P South Africa DSW Capped Index in the year under review, but only a little more than 15% beat the uncapped equivalent: Source: S&P Dow Jones As you extend the time frame, those numbers decrease, regardless of the benchmark used. Even using the capped index, less than a quarter of local active managers managed to outperform over the past five years, which is usually the shortest period on which returns should be judged. Looking at average fund performance tells a similar story. The average local fund underperformed both benchmarks over all time periods, but the size of that underperformance increases over time. Source: S&P Dow Jones Of some encouragement to investors, however, is that the majority of them saw better performance than this average. If one asset weights fund performance, which increases the contribution of larger funds and lowers that of smaller funds, the average increases by at least a full percentage point over every time period. While this asset weighted average is still lower than both benchmarks over five years, it is higher than the S&P South Africa DSW Capped Index for both the one- and three-year periods under review. Source: S&P Dow Jones Global funds With the current level of interest in investing offshore, South Africans should also take note of what the SPIVA scorecard reveals about the performance of global equity funds managed by local firms. In this category it has been extremely difficult for funds to outperform a broad global benchmark. Source: S&P Dow Jones Indices Less than 3.5% of funds outperformed the index over five years. In a universe of 40 funds, that represents only a single manager. As one would expect, the average performance of funds in this category is well below the benchmark. Although the average once again improves when it is asset weighted, it remains below the index. Source: S&P Dow Jones Source: S&P Dow Jones