The financial and operational disclosure landscape has changed dramatically for multinational companies in the last three years. It is now compulsory for these companies to detail – through country-by-country (CbC) reports as well as master and local files – how and why they charge for services and goods to and from subsidiaries. This transfer pricing information will now be shared by tax authorities who have signed up for various Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) plans that aim to eradicate the erosion of tax bases by companies shifting profits to low tax jurisdictions. “This increased level of disclosure should mean that tax administrations are better equipped to determine areas of transfer pricing risk and make better selections of cases for audit,” says Karen Miller, a specialist consultant at Webber Wentzel. The OECD’s focus is on aligning profit with value creation – it has always been of the view that profit should follow value-add functions and risk assumption in any transfer pricing analysis. “However, recent updates of the OECD transfer pricing guidelines have focused on this in a much greater amount of detail,” says Miller. “The days of setting up limited operations in low tax jurisdictions are over. Tests for substance are now not just about testing for tax residence, but very much part of the transfer pricing analysis.” South Africa implemented the requirement for multinationals to submit their reports to the South African Revenue Service (Sars) in October last year. Sars will now get information about their activities on a global level, including the profits generated in those jurisdictions and whether there are offshore intermediary companies such as marketing and procurement hubs located in more favourable tax jurisdictions that are reporting high levels of profitability. Sars’s aim is to detect whether there is any risk of erosion of the South African tax base through profit shifting as a result of transfer mispricing, says Miller. These centralised hubs have been attracting the attention of many tax authorities because of the potential to shift profits to lower tax jurisdictions. Miller says most global mining operations have moved to centralised marketing and procurement operations that purchase the ore from all group mines before selling it on to customers. This removed the opportunity for customers to create competitive pricing. “The point is that the marketing or procurement company is not only buying from the South African operations, but it is also buying from all its operations,” explains Miller. If a customer needs a specific raw material, and the South African producer is unable to supply it because of labour unrest or strikes, the marketing company can source the material from another mine within the group. As a result, with the value-add marketing functions moved offshore, countries with mining operations saw a reduction in profitability. Over the last decade, these models have been adopted by many industries and are being expanded to offer not only marketing and procurement but centralised services, IT and treasury and finance functions. Service payments have been regarded as base-erosion payments. One of the key focus areas for tax authorities is whether the company receiving the service is paying a commensurate amount for it, or whether the parent company is just pushing down costs to these hubs with no real benefits. The recipient of the service must be able to explain the commercial benefit of the activity they are being charged for and demonstrate that the payment is commensurate with the benefit. This is where the information contained in the master and local files (supporting documentation) becomes crucial. In conjunction with the CbC report, South African taxpayers are also required to complete and submit supporting documentation where the aggregate of intra-group transactions is R100 million or more. Having robust supporting documentation can help a company to avoid questions from Sars or any other tax administration, says Miller. “At best it should minimise the level of questions raised by Sars [in] those areas it considers to be of greater risk.” Multinationals should also consider running their own analytical tests, not only to identify possible areas of risk which may lead to queries but also to analyse whether their current transfer pricing policy makes commercial sense. “In some cases compiling the CbC report is the first time a group may get a detailed summary of its global position.” Miller says the initial compiling of the CbC report and supporting documents will be “incredibly onerous”. In fairness to revenue authorities – large multinationals should have done this a long time ago. “They should not see this as a tax-driven requirement, but as a business requirement. When companies look at the country-by-country reports and they run their own analytical tests they may notice if there are concerns from a commercial perspective, never mind a tax perspective. They should have been doing this as a best practice in any event.” However, it is no longer about best practice. It is now a statutory requirement across the globe for companies operating in countries that have signed up to the base erosion and profit shifting (Beps) minimum standards. Companies whose pricing policies were not aligned with their commercial realities have felt the pain since the increased focus on transfer pricing. The likes of Google (£130 million), Facebook (US$3.5 million) and Coca-Cola (US$3 billion) have received sizeable transfer pricing assessments. “To date Sars has settled all its transfer pricing disputes, making the facts and amounts confidential, but it is just a matter of time before the first case hits the courts,” says Miller.