Tesla’s Elon Musk continues to flirt with trouble on Twitter. The chief executive officer posted on Monday that he had deleted all references to the titles he held at Tesla, then joked that in doing so, he may have confused “the authorities.” Deleted my Tesla titles last week to see what would happen. I’m now the Nothing of Tesla. Seems fine so far. — Elon Musk (@elonmusk) October 29, 2018  Legally required officers of a corporation are president, treasurer & secretary. Guess I have to keep 1st one or it will confuse the authorities. — Elon Musk (@elonmusk) October 29, 2018  The posts were not-so-subtle jabs at the US Securities and Exchange Commission, which sued Musk last month over tweets he sent about trying to take Tesla private. The billionaire agreed to pay a $20 million penalty and relinquish the role of chairman as part of a settlement. Tesla also assented to setting up controls to oversee Musk’s social media posts regarding the company. The settlement hasn’t stopped Musk, 47, from repeatedly needling the SEC. Late Friday, he said an unspecified tweet that cost him $20 million was “worth it.” While the agency actually took issue with several of Musk’s posts in its lawsuit, an initial missive in which he claimed to have secured the funding for a Tesla buyout was perhaps the most notorious one. Worth it — Elon Musk (@elonmusk) October 27, 2018  Earlier this month, Musk trolled the SEC by calling it the “Shortseller Enrichment Commission” and mockingly wrote that it was “doing incredible work.” He then ranted about short selling over the course of more than 20 hours, calling for it to be banned. Just want to that the Shortseller Enrichment Commission is doing incredible work. And the name change is so on point! — Elon Musk (@elonmusk) October 4, 2018  On October 16, a US judge signed off on the SEC settlement, after Tesla, Musk and the regulator said in a joint filing that the deal was in the best interest of investors. Tesla slipped in after-hours trading Monday following Musk’s tweets, falling as much as 1.3% to $330.60. The shares are up about 7.6% this year. © 2018 Bloomberg L.P