On Friday, October 12, Moneyweb interviewed Discovery Life CEO Hylton Kallner in an effort to understand why the life insurer believes it had “no alternative” but to divulge personal client information in court documents it filed as part of a court case against a former employee. At issue is why it disclosed the information in such detail, and under what circumstances Discovery would consider such steps. Read the background to the story here. Discovery has filed an application to seal the court papers. Below is a transcript of the first 27 minutes of the interview. Where necessary, square bracket inserts have been added for context. HYLTON KALLNER: You may think that we overreact to these kinds of things, but we take them very, very, very seriously. So anything that sort of questions our intent in any way, we tend to probably take more seriously than others would. Hence the reaction that I think you’ve probably picked up. I think in this case, we really feel that that is justified in a sense. That is probably the reason why you feel like we are … sort of reacting in a completely disproportionate level to this, but I think it sort of reflects the seriousness that we take it with and the huge sensitivity that we have. We really do. I think it is important to state that up front. Hopefully you appreciate that. Hopefully. INGÉ LAMPRECHT: Ja, no I do. So the reason I wanted to chat to you is, I’m still struggling to understand a few things. I read the court documents and I understand that … so Discovery has client information and other information that it wants to protect, and it is within its right to do so. I don’t question that at all. And I also appreciate that when an employee leaves a company there are certain things that need to be protected, so I get everything that has happened here. Like I explained to Felicity [Hudson, Discovery’s head of reputation management], my concern is not what the advisor did or what Discovery did, because that is for a court of law to decide and that is why your upcoming court case is coming. My concern is that, in this escalation between Discovery and the advisor, private client information was put out there in a notice of motion that was filed last month. From what you sent me yesterday [e-mailed answers to questions] it seems like you wanted to protect these people, and you believe that the advisor’s unlawful conduct left you with no alternative but to put this motion into the public record. So my concern is that that client information is not a number or a name, it is cell phone numbers, ID numbers; it is very, very detailed information. And I am trying to understand why you felt that attaching that to a public record was necessary to protect the clients, because from where I stand, if I was one of the clients – I’m not one of those clients, but if I was one of the clients – I would have wanted at least to be phoned beforehand and said, look, we are bringing this court case against an advisor which we believe acted unlawfully, are you happy for us to disclose full details in these court documents? So that I’m trying to understand. So my only concern here is – like I said, it is for the court to decide what happened here, I cannot decide that and it is not my role here – but I want to understand if these people involved, 1 000 of your clients, were treated fairly and from the response I [have received] this far, I am really struggling to understand that this was the case here. HYLTON KALLNER: So I think, I mean you raise a number of issues in it. The first is, we use obviously what we consider to be excellent legal minds on these issues. You know these are not decisions that we take as laypeople. And so in this instance we didn’t just take it upon ourselves to go through the process. We consulted external legal advisors as well as senior counsel, who then acted on our behalf. So this is not … you know, these are not … I don’t know … [the] sort of decisions which were taken lightly or without the right level of input. There is a huge amount of due diligence that’s been done and subsequently – following your questions – you asked exactly the same questions. We were saying was there an opportunity to maybe go to the court with less information? And in fact, from senior counsel, the feedback we got once again, was absolutely not. This is the information that was absolutely required in order to demonstrate the extent of the unlawful behaviour and the transgressions that took place. They had to be matched back exactly and any contact that subsequently took place would need to be on the basis of the information in the actual court papers, etc. So they actually gave I think a fairly comprehensive response as to the rationale. Having said that, there is a lot more information that was unlawfully taken, that relates obviously to clients, that absolutely wasn’t included. You know, things like health information, underwriting for life policies etc. You know those are all included in client files that an advisor would, by necessity, have access to as part of their interactions with the client. So none of that information was obviously included. So I’m not sure that I necessarily agree with you around the extent of the information, relative to what was being protected and also, the fact that from a legal perspective, this was deemed to be the absolute bare minimum of information that needed to be in the court documentation. I think we also, maybe a fundamental point of disagreement, is the public nature of the court documents, and rightfully so. You’ve raised a lot of good questions around this issue, which has made us obviously go back and ensure that, you know, was the right due diligence done, etc. So, from a legal perspective, it is absolutely clear, you know, in terms of PoPI [the Protection of Personal Information Act], and the protection of information through the court process and the disclosure, and so this isn’t an issue of legality. It is an issue of, as you say, you know, sort of almost intent. Is the intent right, to protect clients in this instance? And I guess, you know, when you play it through, the intent is absolutely that. So did we contact clients? Yes, we have contacted clients. So actually, there was a process underway throughout this entire period not just to write to the clients, but to phone them. So … INGÉ LAMPRECHT: Just to understand fully, before you filed the motion in court, the motion … HYLTON KALLNER: No, no, no. So, not to get their permission … INGÉ LAMPRECHT: What I want to understand is before the client information was put into public record though the process, in other words, before you filed the information in September – that was on the 10th of September, so a month ago – did any or all or some of the clients that [were] in that attachment that was put into the public domain – were any of them phoned and said: We are going to … [put your information in court documents?] HYLTON KALLNER: I don’t know. Sorry, I don’t know the timing on it. I know that by now – sorry, up to today – that they’ve all been notified, either in writing or telephonically, and I think over 50% of them even contacted telephonically, which is obviously hard because even though you can try to get 1 000 people, they have to answer the phone. So they actually have been notified of the advisor’s actions and the fact that their information was included in this. So I think that … INGÉ LAMPRECHT: Just to be clear on that: They have been notified of the advisor’s actions. Have they been notified that their personal information – phone numbers, cell phone numbers, ID numbers – have been put into public record through a court document? HYLTON KALLNER: So when you say public record, I mean, maybe that is the other sort of point where I think that we really do disagree, in a sense, because the court files have been sealed. So to our knowledge, the only party who has this is the advisor who had this before – that is the reason we went to court, is to get it back – and yourself. So we’ve actually looked at the log. So the process is such where the information – the requisition process is such that we can actually ascertain if there is any kind of disclosure of this information, and there hasn’t been. Besides the advisor, who would have had it anyway [who had the information in any case] and yourself – and I think we can surmise as to where that was obtained from given that nobody else has requisitioned the information through the court process, which is a lengthy one – so when you keep on saying, putting it into the public … there is no member of the public that can access this information to my knowledge … INGÉ LAMPRECHT: No, so Mr Kallner, with all due respect, a court document is by nature a public document, so the fact that no-one has requisitioned it doesn’t make it any less of a public document. HYLTON KALLNER: Well, no – the fact that the file is sealed does. INGÉ LAMPRECHT: Ja, so today the file is sealed. Yesterday the file wasn’t sealed. So there was a month where this file wasn’t sealed. HYLTON KALLNER: But it wasn’t accessed. So none of the clients’ information have been accessed at all. So where we are today, ’cause I think let’s understand that, ’cause I think it is important. Because it also goes to the honesty and integrity of the process. We acted with what we think is absolute good faith. You know, an advisor removes files inappropriately, we’ve got an obligation to get that back, for our clients, and for the organisation. But we have had a couple of complaints from clients already, being contacted by the advisor, and their, I guess their sort of new employers, and we’ve had to act on that, because obviously that is – I guess we were faced with two options: One, just notify clients that the advisor has left and has removed their client information with him, that is the one [option], and we probably would have fulfilled our obligation – legally – through that. I think financial advisors by their very nature are in a position of trust, from both the organisation and their client, and so while they are employed here, you know, I think there is an expectation on the client’s part, and in fact they give permission for the advisor to have access to that information while they are employed here, but after they leave, obviously their expectation, I think reasonably, would be that Discovery wouldn’t allow the advisor to take that information with them. And so from our side I guess we had two options. The one is just notify clients that this advisor’s employment is terminated, but he has removed information relating to their files as part of that and, you know, we’ve asked for it back, but it is sort of what it is. I don’t think that clients would feel comfortable with that. The second option is to take every sort of legal step to get that information back, which is exactly what we proceeded to do. And I think that that process is done with absolute sort of good intentions around ensuring the protection of our clients’ information. It wasn’t information, I guess, that they didn’t expect the advisor to have while he was employed here. But it is certainly information that they wouldn’t expect him to have afterwards and it is really that step … Now, in terms of the court process, you know, there, I think, you know, you ask some reasonable questions. And I think in all course[s] of events – when you actually interrogate the process of accessing court records and the rationale for doing that – while in theory anybody could go through that, you would only do it if you had a specific intent, and I think, you know, what you highlighted is that somebody with ill intent, may actually, if they were alerted to that fact, that this court case is in process, may actually go through that process – of accessing the files, requisitioning them, etc, etc. And while we had no reason to believe that that would have been the case, the fact that you highlighted it, that somebody obviously gave you the court files, highlighted that potential risk. It wasn’t that it was illegal in any way, ’cause, as I said PoPI actually makes provision for this exact scenario, situation. We then took the step to seal the files, knowing that they haven’t been accessed by any other party. So had we not done it, yes, that risk could have continued and be left open. INGÉ LAMPRECHT: When did you start the process – HYLTON KALLNER: To seal them? Probably about … I actually don’t know the day, to be quite honest, at all. We can check. INGÉ LAMPRECHT: Why did you start it? HYLTON KALLNER: Purely, as far as we are concerned, as a precaution to ensure that, once the risk was highlighted to us, that somebody would dishonestly or inappropriately want to access the file to use it for any purpose other than the protection of the clients’ information, we said: Have it sealed. INGÉ LAMPRECHT: When was this risk highlighted to you? HYLTON KALLNER: I can’t say at all, but I’d imagine it is probably a few weeks ago. INGÉ LAMPRECHT: You filed the court papers a few weeks ago. HYLTON KALLNER: Yes, and I assume that it was probably soon after that. INGÉ LAMPRECHT: It is very different if you started the seal process on the day you filed it [the notice of motion was filed on September 10, 2018] and if you started one on Monday [October 8, the day Moneyweb first asked Discovery to explain its decision to add client information to court documents]? HYLTON KALLNER: Ingé, I can’t comment on when it was done. The point is that, as we stand today – but sorry, the result is the same, because nobody else has accessed them. So when you say, like, are clients at risk today? No. There isn’t a single one of those clients who, unless you, I guess, chose to release their personal information – being the only party outside of the two people involved in the court case [to have the documents] – and we are going after the other party purely to get the information back, then there is absolutely no risk of it. I think, so have they been protected, in terms of what we originally wanted to do – assuming that we were able to be successful in the court case – then absolutely we would have got the information back from the advisor who removed it unlawfully and sealed the file, so that information is then obviously sealed from any further use. So I mean I think that is probably a good outcome from the clients’ perspective, I’d like to think. INGÉ LAMPRECHT: Okay, so help me understand. You wanted to protect the information, but you put the information in a court document, a public file, thereby disclosing the information. As you mentioned, it means that people could have accessed it, other people – competitors potentially. And also, I think what one needs to appreciate at the moment is we live in a world where we assume that because a record [log] says something, only these people have accessed it. All I need to do is take my phone out, do this [take a picture] and have a photo of a client list and disseminate it. That is the risk here, which is why there is an expectation from clients that you should be protecting their personal information to the best of your ability. So help me understand – you mentioned already, that the legal department felt that you had to match the breach and therefore you could disclose the information granularly in the public documents … HYLTON KALLNER: Some of it. So, only enough to actually demonstrate the sort of unique client details, identifiers and where a breach has actually occurred or could occur in the future to tie it back to the information in the court documents. I guess, the question I maybe – I want – to ask to you is what do you think we should have done? Having had the advisor removed the information, should we just have left it? INGÉ LAMPRECHT: No, of course not. What I am saying is that the information should not have been put in a public document, a court file, in that granular detail – cell phone numbers, ID numbers, e-mail addresses. Look at it this way – this is important from a broader perspective as well, because Discovery is arguably the leading company in South Africa collecting personal data of people, not only medical information, heart rate data, driving information, and, I would argue, therefore has a really big obligation to protect the people’s information. So my question is that, if I know that information that I entrusted to Discovery could be used in a court process, as part of public documents, at what point will Discovery disclose my personal information because it needs to match a breach by one of their former employees, or for other reasons, because then it makes me feel – okay, no, I don’t want to share my personal data with Discovery anymore because, even despite what the legals say, there is real risk here that my personal data could be put out there because there is some legal process going on here or whatever, and this is fundamentally what this is about – it is about a client asking: At what point is there a risk that for whatever reason my information will be put out there? HYLTON KALLNER: So I think hopefully you see I mean, and that’s maybe our concern here, is that the incorrect impression is created – if you position it in that way, and nothing could be further from the truth. We have taken every step here to protect the information, and all of the information that you refer to, health information, medical information, all of those things are what potentially could have been at risk here. That is what we are protecting. You can look at it I guess, from either sort of dimension, everything, I think, and that applies to most things in life. Depending on the sort of – the point of view that you take – you’ll come to different conclusions. If you look at our actions with positive good intent, that we will go to the ends of the earth to protect our clients’ information, I think you’d come to a very different conclusion. And I don’t think that anything, sort of legally, forced us to go to court to get the information back. I think we could have … and I am not a lawyer, so I may be wrong, I think that we would have been probably legally within the sort of framework to have simply notified clients that, you know, this advisor has left our employ and we believe has removed some information. We have, I mean, we’ve got what we believe to be reasonable proof – because the courts will determine that – but that probably would have absolved any sort of risk on our side. We didn’t deem that to be sufficient. So I think the – you can look at it one of two ways. I think, hopefully, having heard the bona fides around this will give you a sense of comfort. I guess it is only through the controls and the systems that we have in place that we are able to identify these kinds of things. You know, [in] the absence of the steps that we take to protect the data and monitoring and systems etc, we probably wouldn’t have even been aware of the fact that the advisor had acted in this way. It is purely because of the steps that we have, or the protection that we have in place, that we are able to understand this and then, the sort of, the seriousness that we take it, that we will go to these sort of extremes to then ensure that client information is completely protected. I think that is, you know, that hopefully is what comes through very, very clearly here. INGÉ LAMPRECHT: May I ask, was there not an opportunity for you to make the information available to the court as you did – that client file – without it being ‘open’ in that sense – in other words, say we are only giving you [the judge] access, or we are giving you [the court] access to a redacted version. We want to demonstrate to you this alleged breach, but we don’t want to put this information out there like this? HYLTON KALLNER: There we do rely on, obviously, legal experts, in terms of what the correct process is. So there I’m happy to get our senior counsel to give you a proper legal view as to why they believed and believe – because we’ve interrogated this – that this was the correct legal approach and required legal approach. So I’m happy to get senior counsel to engage with you on that because we actually did ask that very question – you know, were there alternatives etc, and they actually gave a very, very strong legal opinion on this exact issue.