A new report on retirement readiness among South Africa found that significantly more women than men just don’t have a plan for retirement, which suggests that the gender inequality gap will continue to extend into retirement. 10X Investment’s first annual Retirement Reality Report (RRR), released on September 30, found that women need more for retirement (since they live longer than men on average), but that they in fact have saved less. The report noted that women in South Africa earn around a quarter less than their male counterparts, ‘a disparity that is exacerbated by the increased likelihood that their careers will be interrupted during pregnancy and child-rearing’. A surprising statistic revealed by the report, is that a large proportion of women don’t have a plan in place to bridge the retirement gap. The RRR found that 43% of female respondents didn’t have any form of retirement plan, compared to 39% of men. Failing to plan is tantamount to planning to fail and I urge women to take charge of their future. Women who assume ‘My man is my plan’ risk a nasty shock. Even for the happily married, it is important to have an understanding of your finances. We should have to plan for the worst (divorce and death), even if we hope for the best (a long and happy marriage). Don’t believe anyone who tells you that retirement planning is too complex for you. It is not. Modern technology, such as online calculators that work to help you understand where you are, where you need to be and how to bridge the gap. This brings retirement planning within anyone’s grasp. To be confident in managing their finances and to enable them to narrow the gap with men, women need only to understand the basics. By saving 15% of your salary from day one until you retire (i.e. a working life of around 40 years), invest your savings in a well-diversified high equity fund and keep fees low. Investing is simple, your money grows by the gap between returns (what you earn) and fees (what you pay) so, simply put, you need to maximise growth and minimise fees. Money grows through wealth creation and, since companies create wealth through profits, it makes sense that you want to own shares in companies. So how do you decide which companies to own? You don’t, rather use an index tracking fund to own a little bit of all of them. Fees are charged for services provided so the easiest way to reduce them is to avoid buying things you don’t need, such as a platform, an investment consultant, or an expensive fund manager. The best way to those two things? Invest in a low-cost index tracking fund.” Sohini Castille, Head of Employees Benefits Consulting at 10X Investments