Here’s what caught our attention on Tuesday: 1. Group Five delivers losses Construction company Group Five is reporting a fully diluted headline loss per share of 1 380 cents for the year ended June 30, 2018, from 853 cents loss in the previous year. The company’s earnings per share also came to a 1 335 cents loss. Revenue from continuing operations was at R7.3 billion, which is a decline from the R9.9 billion recorded the previous year. Group Five will not be declaring a dividend for the period. 2. MTN scraps Nigeria IPO MTN has been at loggerheads with the Nigerian Central Bank over an alleged illegal dividend payout. On Monday, the telecommunications company said that it may no longer need to raise capital through the initial public offering in Nigeria, and may instead consider an ‘introduction’ in which existing shares are listed on the bourse, as an alternative, according to Bloomberg. 3. Sassa beneficiaries protected by law The first day of October was the first official day that the South African Post Office took over the distribution of social grants. In the wake of the transition, Moneyweb reports that the Supreme Court of Appeal made a ruling on Thursday that it would draft legislation to protect social grant beneficiaries from unlawful deductions, an issue that simmered while CPS was responsible for the distribution of social grants. 4. PwC mining report PwC has released its mining report for 2018. The report provides an outlook into the performance of the world’s 40 largest mining companies. Accordingly, PwC says the mining companies delivered an ‘impressive financial performance’ in 2017, with revenue increasing by 23% to $600 billion. PwC forecasts that the 2018 performance will continue its positive streak. Read the full report here. 5. Rand update With fuel hikes on everyone’s lips, road users are looking for one less expense or a strengthening rand to cover their backs in the month of October. Bloomberg is reporting that two major events are looming over South Africa’s economy, namely the delivery of the mid-term budget speech and Moody’s rating review. The rand was at R14.29 at 8:47 on Tuesday morning.