Back in 2004, when Englishman David Kneale accepted an offer to join the Clicks Group, he thought he would spend five years in South Africa. “I certainly didn’t think we would one day come to call South Africa home,” he says. But that is exactly what has happened. And so it was that last week, 13 years later, Kneale delivered his last set of annual results. “I think one should leave when people ask why you are leaving, rather than when you are leaving.” In the period the group has changed dramatically. When he joined the business, Clicks had lost its way. It wasn’t the pioneering pharmacy company that had launched SA’s first loyalty card (today Clicks ClubCard is the biggest loyalty scheme in SA with 7.8 million users), with a vision of becoming a true drugstore, complete with in-house pharmacies. Instead, the company was broken and neglected following a long-running battle with government over the right of companies (rather than individuals) to legally own pharmacies. In 2005 Kneale was appointed as deputy CEO. A few months later he assumed the role of CEO following the resignation of CEO, Trevor Honeysett. In what has been a remarkable journey, but with a very tough first six years, the group has been rehabilitated and has become a JSE (and foreign investor) darling. Clicks share chart over eight years Source: Sharenet In the year to August 2018, the group grew diluted headline earnings per share by 15.1% to 578 cents. Turnover rose by 9.1% to R29.2 billion with operating profit increasing by 12.6% to exceed R2.0 billion (up from R358 million in 2005). The retailer generated cash inflows from operations of R2.5 billion and ended the financial year with cash of R1.5 billion. Shareholders will receive a total dividend of 380 cents per share, 18% higher than last year, with the dividend payout ratio being raised from 60% to 62%. Clicks Group was included in the FTSE/JSE Top 40 Index in June this year Over the 13-year period (2005-2017) return on equity increased from 14.5% to 44.1%, with a target of 50-60%; and headline earnings from 65.2 cents per share to 611.9 cents per share at the end of the 2018 financial year, a compound annual growth of 20.5%. In the same time frame, net asset value per share has increased from 394c to 1 811c. But numbers are not what Kneale is about, though he says otherwise: “I love the number 13, it’s the date I got married and the number of years I’ve been at Clicks.” In truth, for him, numbers are simply the logical outcome of a series of inputs. “I’ve worked with two great CFOs in whom I have faith and confidence, Keith Warburton and Michael Fleming. I’m numerate, but I have a degree in history, not a CA.” Instead, it’s the retail, human and process side of the business that really gets his brain whirring. Every journalist and analyst knows that for 13 years Kneale has beat the same drum – Clicks is a value retailer with a few core pillars: * Good competition at everyday prices. * Promotions (35% of sales are off a promotion). * Clicks ClubCard, which has 7.8 million members, 800 000 more than last year, and gave back more than R440 million in cash in the last financial year. “This is why the brand has performed,” says Kneale. * And lastly, Clicks’ private label brand, which has grown strongly over the years. “Retailing is a straightforward business,” says Kneale. “It’s about doing lots of small things well at the same time, which is what the Clicks machine has become good at.” That said, business is also about continuous improvement. So while Clicks has a few key performance pillars, which have not changed, how you execute on these does change. “Take our ClubCard – we used to post paper vouchers in time for Christmas. But the postal service became unreliable so we invested in technology to load the cashback onto your card. In the process we saved ourselves R20 million in postage fees and have a better communication channel with our customers.” Kneale also cites the partnerships with Shell and Sorbet to offer customers rewards for filling up or spending with them. “You have to find ways of delivery that are new and relevant.” So can the business grow operating profit to R3 billion or R4 billion in an environment of flat economic growth? “Absolutely. By doing more of the same. Without sounding arrogant, I’m leaving a business in good shape. We have appointed an internal successor, which I believe demonstrates a lot of talent in the group, and we have a long runway of growth. Today we have 630 stores and our goal is 900, all with pharmacies. This should take us to R3 billion in operating profit and should be achievable within the next seven to 10 years – though my successor may not like the timeframe.” Currently, 50% of South African households live within 5 km of a Clicks store. In the UK or US, 75% of the population lives within a similar radius. “Drugstores are about convenience, that is the heart of the Clicks model,” Kneale says. A combination of an urbanising population and the move into small-town South Africa supports the business model. An ageing population helps too. “Yes, 30% of the population is under 30, but the birth rate is declining. The over 60s are the fastest growing part of the population and they need healthcare.” Kneale feels strongly that pharmacy groups like Clicks can play an important role in President Cyril Ramaphosa’s recent call to action. “South Africa is the most illiberal country in the world when it comes to the scheduling and dispensing of medicines. You should be able to buy Nurofen in a garage forecourt – it is over-scheduled – we need to improve access to medicine.” In addition, pharmacists should be trained in primary therapy dispensing. “Why should people have to take a day off work to go to a clinic when a pharmacist and in-house clinic could provide the same service? And why can’t our nurses dispense family planning?” From January 2019 all Clicks employees will be covered by primary care health insurance and trauma care insurance. This will cover treatment in the private sector, as well as optometry and dental. “We can help the government by doing our bit to take people out of state clinics,” he says. While Kneale will soon be vacating the hot seat, he says he will be on call to the new CEO, current COO Vikesh Ramsunder, until August next year. After that, he says, he won’t be putting foot in a shopping centre for a very long time.