Here’s what caught our attention on Tuesday: 1. Finance minister takes IMF trip The finance minister’s diary appears to be full and his movements are certainly keeping South Africa and the rand busy. On Tuesday, Nhlanhla Nene will be travelling to Indonesia to attend a meeting held by the International Monetary Fund, thus easing speculation of his dismissal. Opposition parties put pressure on Nene to resign as finance minister after he confessed to meeting with the Guptas at their Saxonwold compound. He has apparently asked the Presidency to relieve him of his duties, but the Presidency claims it was not aware of the request. 2. Calls for Nene to be investigated The ANC’s opposition, the Democratic Alliance is calling on the Public Protector to investigate Nhlanhla Nene for allegedly breaching the executive code of ethics during his tenure as deputy finance minister. Reuters is reporting that the Public Protector will be looking into the DA’s complaint that centers around allegations over an investment by the PIC into a Mozambican refinery project. 3. Afrocentric makes acquisition Afrocentric issued a statement via Sens on Tuesday confirming its acquisition of a further 74% in Activo Health for R588 million, which will be settled via a combination of cash and by issuing Afrocentric ordinary shares. The motivation for the acquisition is to boost growth by expanding its pharmaceutical supply and medical distribution network. 4. Kibo Energy completes acquisition Kibo Energy confirmed via Sens on Tuesday that it has completed the acquisition of a 60% equity interest in Mast Energy Developments, a UK-based company which develops and operates flexible power plants that service the Reserve Power generation market. Kibo will issue 5 714 286 new ordinary shares at a price of 5.25 pence each. 5.Rand update The swing of the rand is one to watch and seems to be responding to the movements of the finance minister. At 9:27 on Tuesday, the rand was at R14.88 to the dollar. Its firming is attributed to the minister’s trip to Indonesia for the IMF meeting.