In the ongoing debate around active and passive investment management, passive seems to be winning, judging by the flow of funds from active to passive options. But demand for investment products that can outperform the market remains strong, and active managers who can run strategies at lower costs with a controlled tracking error are likely to create a happy medium with better than average investment returns. “There is no denying that over the last couple of years, there has been a remarkable flow from active to more passive investment strategies,” says Bastian Teichgreeber, head of asset allocation at Prescient Investment Management, an active investment management company. However, he says Prescient believes in the mean reversion of price-earnings (PE) ratios, and that there are “significant temporary market dislocations which create opportunities”. Prescient does not see the future of asset management heading towards pure passive solutions. “Having said that, one can’t deny the numbers,” says Teichgreeber. “Over the last couple of years, the flow from active to more passive strategies has been remarkable. We are convinced, however, that there is more to this trend than just discussing whether active or passive is the smarter approach.” The growing preference for passives is the result of several factors including performance, fees and tracking error. “Investors are not only disappointed by the [on average] poor performance of active managers, but more so also by the fact that they pay up for this underperformance and sometimes are even exposed to increased risk taking.” However, a recent study conducted in the US shows that the flows from active managers into passive mandates is far less pronounced once the active managers run a strategy at more reasonable costs and with a controlled tracking error. Teichgreeber says Prescient has all the necessary passive skills. One of its co-founders, Herman Steyn, launched the first index tracking fund in South Africa. “Prescient is a systematic asset manager with a deep know-how in derivatives. We are therefore in the perfect spot to create pure passive solutions, he says. “The reason why we don’t do so is simple – we are confident that we can do better.” He believes the trend from active to passive may not continue at its current pace. “Despite the long-running migration of assets under management from active to passive, demand for products that can outperform the market remains strong and is unlikely to ­disappear,” he says. “This is where we fit in. We have a solution that is designed to beat passives by construction and as such, it is designed to also beat actives over time.” He believes the Prescient Balanced Fund combines the best of both worlds as it has active asset allocation, but with a low tracking error, low fees and low transaction costs. “We take into consideration valuations and we are confident that we are able to capture a consistently positive alpha over time.” The fund invests in equities (45%) and interest-bearing assets domestically and overseas. The allocation to the various asset classes will typically remain fixed at the benchmark weights but can be varied tactically from time to time to target outperformance by capitalising on mispricings. Exposure to underlying asset classes is managed “on an enhanced indexation basis where possible”, using strategies to outperform benchmarks. The fund targets returns of 5 to 6% above inflation over the long term. Teichgreeber says Prescient does not see the investment industry heading towards pure passive solutions. “We see the future of asset management in the active space,” he says. “However, as active managers, we should not be oblivious to the fact that passive solutions have a big appeal to investors for good reasons – low fees, low tracking error, low transaction costs. “But there is also an appeal to active strategies – an efficient allocation of capital, the ability to capture bigger market dislocations, and the potential to benefit from undervalued asset classes.” Brought to you by Prescient Investment Management (Pty) Ltd. Disclaimer Information on the Prescient Balanced Fund (“the Fund”), including risks associated with investing in the Fund, are available from the manager, Prescient Management Company (RF) (Pty) Ltd, including a schedule of fees, charges and maximum commissions, at http//:www.prescient.co.za/. By “positive alpha” is meant the fund’s excess performance over that of its benchmark. The Fund is a collective Investment scheme in securities (CIS) which should be considered a medium- to long-term investment. The value of units in the Fund may go up as well as down and past performance is not necessarily a guide to future performance. There is no guarantee in respect of capital or returns in the Fund. The Fund is traded at ruling prices and can engage in borrowing and scrip lending. The manager is registered and approved under the Collective Investment Schemes Control Act (No.45 of 2002). Prescient Investment Management (Pty) Ltd, registration number: 1998/023640/07 is an authorised Financial Services Provider (FSP 612.0) under the Financial Advisory and Intermediary Services Act (No.37 of 2002), to act in the capacity as investment manager.