Earlier this year, President Emmerson Mnangagwa introduced the ‘Zimbabwe is open for business’ concept in a bid to attract investors back to the cash-strapped economy. Despite the drive, companies operating in the country continue to face insolvency with the economy still grappling with liquidity woes. With Zimbabwe’s newly appointed finance minister Mthuli Ncube in place, and an ambitious two-year transitional stabilisation programme poised to drive the economy into upper-middle class by 2030, now seems like the time to buy undervalued equities. The latest reforms are set to focus on inclusive growth and, ultimately, opening up businesses to close the fiscal deficit. An economy acquainted with economic crises, Zimbabwe’s latest gloom followed the October 1 fiscal and monetary reforms, which enacted a 2% tax on money transfers, and separation of cash dollars and foreign inflows from bond notes and electronic dollars. The latest fiscal reforms pushed the Zimbabwe bond to 2.8 bond notes to the US dollar, from 1.75 last September. Stock prices on the rise The latest stock price rally signals turbulence on the monetary front as the market readies for inflationary pressure. Latest reports show that the stock market’s rise saw the main index peaking at a record 699.89 points last week. This type of bull run was last seen in November 2017 when the military ousted Robert Mugabe. Traders tend to retreat when they feel the inflationary pressure creeping up, often recoiling into equities when the unpopular bond notes depreciate. The inflation announcement from Zimbabwe National Statistics this week affirmed their concerns, with September year-on-year inflation rising to 5.39%, the highest since 2009 when the country abandoned its own currency and adopted a multi-currency basket anchored in the US dollar. In retaliation, the market has retreated to the stock market, inadvertently pushing up stock prices and signalling foreign-currency woes in the near to mid term. “The spike in stocks is an inverse mirror of the local shortage of US dollars,” says Hasnain Malik, head of equity research at Exotix Capital. “When there is a physical shortage of US dollars, or a lack of confidence in accessibility to US dollar-denominated bank accounts, or expectations of hyperinflation, then Zimbabwean corporates and individuals purchase local equities.” The foreign exchange pressure was confirmed by KFC temporarily closing its fast food outlets in Harare and Bulawayo last week; suppliers demanded US dollars, which the food chain was simply unable to source. The difference in Old Mutual’s share price on the London versus the Zimbabwe stock exchange shows the how bloated the Harare stock is. Source: Bloomberg/Exotix “The Zimbabwe Industrial index of stocks is up around 55% in October,” says Malik. “The Old Mutual implied rate, which is the spread between the price of fungible Old Mutual shares in London and Zimbabwe, has spiked to 637% – from 156% 10 days ago.” As Bloomberg reports, the difference has to collapse for there to be any chance of Zimbabwe normalising. Read: Shelves empty as spectre of hyperinflation returns to Zimbabwe Listen: No end in sight for Zimbabwe’s economic woes