South African government bonds fell and the rand weakened on Thursday, extending losses from the previous session, after the release of a bleak medium-term budget that risks stripping the country of its last investment-grade credit rating. Finance minister Tito Mboweni predicted wider budget deficits and cut growth forecasts in his medium-term budget policy statement (MTBPS) on Wednesday, laying bare the challenges he faces at a time of revenue shortfalls and ballooning debt. The yield on the rand-denominated benchmark 2026 bond was up 7.5 basis points at 9.37%  as of 08:15 GMT, after jumping to 9.46% earlier. That compares with 9.13% before the budget speech. The rand was 0.19% weaker at 14.58 to the dollar after slumping 2% on Wednesday. “I think the market had fully priced in a good MTBPS and zero percent chance of Moody’s moving on the ratings watch. This has now changed,” Standard Bank chief trader Warrick Butler said in a note. “Given that the Treasury has now revealed past discrepancies in the tax collection agency being the main contribution to an increase in the GDP/debt deficit, it is touch and go as to whether (Moody’s) continues to look past current issues until next year’s full budget.” Moody’s is the only one of the three largest rating agencies to rate South Africa at investment grade. S&P Global Ratings and Fitch rate it as junk. Moody’s rates the country’s foreign-currency debt at its lowest investment grade rating of Baa3, with a stable outlook. The Treasury has said it expects Moody’s to review that rating after the budget speech. A cut to sub-investment grade by Moody’s would see South Africa removed from Citi’s influential World Government Bond Index and could trigger a sell-off by foreign investors. President Cyril Ramaphosa has made reviving economic growth a priority since taking office in February, but he has been frustrated by infighting in the ruling African National Congress and by severe fiscal constraints. Ramaphosa will court investors at a three-day investment summit starting on Thursday, where he will be looking for new pledges to meet his target of $100 billion of new investments over the next five years. On the stock market, both the Top-40 index and the broader all-share fell slightly in early trade.