We plan every second of our lives, the well-being of our older selves, our children, our loved ones. We ensure that wills, estates and investments are in order. Yet the most important underlying components of our investments – the companies that we invest in – are failing to adequately plan on leadership continuity and to implement contingencies for when current management leaves. Thabo Mbeki, in his African Renaissance speech, said: “In our world in which the generation of new knowledge and its application to change the human condition is the engine which moves human society further away from barbarism, do we not have need to recall Africa’s hundreds of thousands of intellectuals back from their places of emigration in Western Europe and North America, to rejoin those who remain still within our shores!” We argue that a greater threat to executive leadership potential is not the flight of human capital, but resistance to skills transfer – an issue transcending borders, race and gender, limiting opportunities and leading to – as demonstrated in the Great Gatsby curve – inequality and economic immobility, further entrenching poverty. This is particularly problematic, as the knowledge Mbeki speaks of is not just technical or theoretical – and thus easily learnt – but broader and intangible. It encompasses leadership and strategy with specific application to the generational longevity of businesses. The Great Gatsby Curve Source: The 2012 Economic Report of the [US] President The curve examines income and opportunity inequality as a reflection of socio-economic influences, resulting in inter-generational immobility. The more opportunities available to children, the better the future adults’ resultant living standards. If the concept of this curve is extended to a corporate environment, we deduce that the more a management team (parents) spend on upskilling employees (children), the more opportunities employees have to grow out of lower level jobs, reducing the inequality gap. This is imperative in the information age, where conventional and human capital convert into social and digital capital. If the current socio-economic climate doesn’t facilitate digital education at grassroots level, employers should provide that educational stepping stone resulting in more balanced equality of opportunity. Skills transfer is then an intrinsic key to closing the inequality gap. Lack of collaboration in business culture limits employees’ ability to leverage off their respective knowledge bases – perplexing in these days of data and information revolutions. In corporate SA’s recent past, more than a few managers have moved on without seamless transitions into their vacated positions. Most disturbing are veteran CEOs staving off the inevitable, with the board of directors often unnervingly filling these positions with people from outside of SA with limited institutional memory and innate cultural contexts with which to seamlessly continue the running of these businesses. Some former CEOs have continued serving as board members, further entrenching the old regime and culture. Despite successful value creation, the lack of seamless transitions when they leave (resulting from a culture of limited skills transfer) is a terrible indictment on their scorecards. It creates a legacy of value destruction from a severe lack of stakeholder integration driven by the loss of institutional memory. The context underpinning business processes and long-term capital expenditure projects is lost. A shift in strategy post a senior management switch could considerably change a shareholders’ long-term investment thesis. Environmental, social and governance (ESG) scorecards place importance on the quality of a management team in the valuation process, but the issue of clearly delineated succession planning underpinned by skills transfer appears to be a less robust and forceful conversation transpiring with management and company boards. Driving this issue across strongly in management meetings as an integral input into company valuations is imperative. As investors tie up capital for the medium- to long-term, they need to understand how the strategy – including succession – of the company unfolds over time relative to their investment thesis and time horizon. Companies tend to trade on a management franchise premium (or discount), valuing the ability of management to successfully allocate capital and create value. The quality of a management team reflects in valuations. Returns link directly to risks on the efficient frontier relative, so the management team of a business is an integral component of this risk through their ability to generate a suitable return. More importance should be given to succession planning and skills transfer in the valuation of businesses. The market should be a self-regulating beast, with investment communities as fiduciaries asking questions on behalf of shareholders, holding management and company boards accountable. It appears that in this we are becoming negligent. Questionable management decisions (backed by boards) have destroyed shareholder value and are left unaccounted for. Shareholders suffer value attrition and are poorer for it. Board members should be chastised and take ultimate responsibility for errant CEOs. Earnings mobility increases with inter-generational skills transfer, helping disadvantaged employees close inequality gaps by leveraging off more experienced employees. Vast amounts of experience and information are discarded along with veteran employees as retirement ages are reached. The mentorship role they play should not be flippantly disregarded. Corporates should recognise new-age truths, adjusting policies to accommodate increasing longevity. Industries are cyclical, and it takes decades to trade through these cycles. The knowledge and experience veteran employees hold shouldn’t be lost as frivolously as is currently occurring. Loyalty and commitment are values welcomed by companies in employees. Losing institutional memory is wasteful and lacking in precisely these ideals, impeding the bedding down of these values in current employees. Departures are often unpredictable. With clearly defined succession planning and skills transfer as an intrinsic underpin to business culture, not only is the longevity of a business secured, but value is created for all stakeholders. This ultimately ensures a much sought after social good: the elusive ‘better life for all’. Rahima Cassim is an investment professional. A version of this piece was first published by Ashburton Investments and can be read here.