The only lever South Africa can use to really get the economy going is private sector investment, according to one of president Cyril Ramaphosa’s special envoys. “The government hasn’t got the money to kick-start this economy through a Keynesian stimulus package,” says former Standard Bank CEO Jacko Maree. He was speaking at the launch of the South African Impact Investment Forum. State-owned enterprises are experiencing enormous difficulties and the country cannot generate a consumption boom by lowering interest rates, which would probably end in tears, he says. “We are unlikely to have an emerging markets boom that is going to lift commodity prices through the roof and so forth, and so therefore we don’t have many levers. The only lever when you think about it actually is … private sector investment. That is the only lever we’ve got to get this flywheel turning.” His comments, which he describes as his personal thoughts, came just one day after finance minister Tito Mboweni in his medium-term budget policy statement (MTBPS) lowered the economic growth forecast for 2018 from 1.5% to 0.7%. The MTBPS also showed that some key fiscal metrics – including the budget deficit and gross debt ratios – have deteriorated since February. The main part of South Africa’s inaugural Investment Summit will take place on Friday in support of Ramaphosa’s plan to lure $100 billion of investment over the next five years. Read: Mini budget in a nutshell Although $100 billion is a lot of money, Maree believes it is achievable. “We think that at least half of it has to come from South Africa.” Maree says discussions with investors have culminated in an “issues log” that has been shared with the presidency. Some of the issues are very specific to the industries involved, but more broadly, investors are just asking for policies that promote investment and growth. “People want long-term certainty because they are investing for the next 15 or 20 years and they want continuity. They don’t want us to keep fiddling with policies and changing every so often – adding a new clause to whatever charter or legislation.” Maree says investors want stable fiscal and monetary policies and a stable exchange rate. Uncertainty around land reform also has to be addressed as it provides investors with an “opportunity to wait and see”. Other issues relate to administered prices. The price of South Africa’s electricity, rail and port tariffs are out of sync with many of its global peers. Maree says Ramaphosa’s stimulus package, the jobs summit and the mini budget are all moving the country in the right direction and provide a sense that issues are being addressed. Exports good for growth While all investment is good from a growth perspective, the best type of investment would be export companies that would create jobs. In line with a greater focus on impact investing as an enabler for inclusive economic growth and job creation, Maree says fund managers have to think about a greater allocation of assets to alternative investments. “It is more difficult than investing in stock markets. Nobody got fired for investing in IBM. It is hard to invest in these asset classes, but the returns are there.” Very few developing countries have such a well-funded pension fund industry as a source of long-term capital as South Africa, says Maree, and the country has to consider how best to utilise that, while also being cognisant of the dangers of prescribed investment. “Lots of people have got ideas of how to use the PIC or the Government Employees Pension Fund and other pension funds to fund good intentions, but at the end of the day you have to make sure that pensioners will be paid their pensions.” While a lot has been written about the creation of a sovereign wealth fund for South Africa, Maree doesn’t think it makes any sense. Where countries do have sovereign wealth funds they were often created out of windfall savings that were invested for future generations. “We don’t have money for a sovereign wealth fund. Yes, we have money and can raise money for an infrastructure fund. I think that makes enormous sense – a public-private partnership.” Maree stresses that corporates must be relevant to the society in which they operate – especially in poorer developing countries like South Africa. The SA Impact Investment Conference was organised by the Bertha Centre for Social Innovation and Entrepreneurship at the UCT Graduate School of Business.