Any farmer will tell you that it is crucial to prioritise feeding the right animals first – the cow that gives you milk, the sheep that produces wool, the hen that lays the egg or the ox that pulls the plough. Especially when resources are scarce these productive animals are fed first, rather than those that represent a hobby or are pets. That is the reality if one wants to have a sustainable farming business. The same goes for a household. Invest and maintain productive assets first. Spend money on the car that takes you to work to earn an income, before the swimming pool that is non-essential and just there for pleasure. As a country we are, however, doing the opposite. In his medium-term budget policy statement (MTBPS) finance minister Tito Mboweni made certain adjustments that boil down to feeding the wrong animals. Read: Bailouts for SAA, Sanral’s e-tolls and more Mboweni took R3 billion in the current year from the Passenger Rail Agency of South Africa (Prasa) and gave it to the South African National Roads Agency (Sanral). This was done to plug the hole left in Sanral’s pocket by defiant motorists who refuse to pay their e-tolls. The United National Transport Union (Untu) protested in a statement, with Untu acting general secretary Sonja Carstens saying: “Prasa provides passenger rail to the poorest of the poor. Trains are the cheapest form of transport for millions of workers.” And they have few viable alternatives. Prasa has all but collapsed, with a diminished fleet as a result of frustrated passengers vandalising rolling stock and the court supervising a comprehensive plan to address serious safety concerns. According to auditor-general Kimi Makwetu, Prasa is no longer a going concern. President Cyril Ramaphosa will on Thursday open a train factory in Dunnottar, Nigel where new rolling stock is currently being manufactured for Prasa. Due to its safety issues Prasa is however not allowed to run these trains, except in one very limited corridor, Untu says. President Cyril Ramaphosa cutting the ribbon during the official opening of the new, multi-billion rand train-manufacturing factory. Picture: GCIS Surely stripping Prasa’s budget can in no way help this crucial agency to get back on its feet, transport workers safely, and sustain the newly opened factory and associated industries. Failing to address Prasa’s problems means workers will continue to be impacted by continuous transport delays that impact productivity and result in job losses. That is not the route towards bigger economic growth. If it is a matter of lack of capacity to spend the budget, that should be addressed rather than transferring it to Sanral. The bells are tolling The e-toll problem has been with us since 2013. Despite Mboweni’s acknowledgement that investors “want to know that our policies are clear and consistent”, this matter is a clear example of inconsistency. The Gauteng ANC, which leads the provincial government, has adopted a resolution to have e-tolls scrapped and Sanral has created an expectation of a pending decision about the matter. This is clearly at odds with Mboweni’s support for the system. I’m sorry, but this kite won’t fly. The sooner the system is scrapped and replaced by another funding model, the better. The delay has already cost Sanral its reputation, its financial health and its status as a going concern. Over and above the R3 billion, Sanral has in the current year been allowed to transfer an additional R2.75 billion from its non-toll portfolio to the toll portfolio to solve its e-toll problem. That means money for road construction and maintenance is taken away from the majority of our roads to pay for just 185 km in Gauteng. While the e-toll roads do play a crucial role in the economy, there is a much better way of funding them than taking away from provisions for the rest of the country’s roads. We are feeding the wrong animal here. Ripple effect Much has been said about South African Airways (SAA), which has received another R5 billion bailout. Mboweni himself questioned the wisdom of the move by citing the closure of Swiss Air to make way for a new, successful airline. A case in point is that Comair CEO Erik Venter on the same day Mboweni delivered his MTBPS announced that Comair had to budget R100 million to mitigate the impact of the poor performance of SAA Technical, a subsidiary of SAA, on the airline’s on-time performance. Read: Comair budgets R100m to clean up SAA’s mess This aspect of SAA’s mess is in fact affecting the whole airline industry as the resulting flight delays have a ripple effect, impacting productivity countrywide as passengers arrive at their destinations late. I doubt this cow is ever going to produce milk. Let’s stop feeding it and put it out of its misery. Mboweni stated that the increased public sector wage bill exceeds the budget by more than R30 billion over the medium term. This he has passed on to national and provincial departments, where it has to be absorbed. While that is the lesser evil compared to lifting the expenditure ceiling, it is not a real solution. Will departments be forced to cut spending on service delivery to ensure the very generous salaries their officials are paid? If that is the case, expect more service delivery protests. More libraries, schools and clinics destroyed. And so the downward spiral continues. We are feeding the wrong animal. And by the way, there is one very hungry animal with huge productive potential that often gets a pat on the head, but seldom any real food – the tourism industry. Read: ‘Government is failing tourism’ Listening to Mboweni on Wednesday it seemed as if he is very aware of the fact that our priorities are skewed. He arrived late on the scene and most probably had little opportunity to change the MTBPS. But now that he has arrived, the question is which animal will he feed first?